1. Allergol Select. 2024 May 3;8:90-198. doi: 10.5414/ALX02444E. eCollection
2024.

AWMF mold guideline "Medical clinical diagnostics for indoor mold exposure" - 
Update 2023 AWMF Register No. 161/001.

Hurraß J(1)(2)(3), Heinzow B(4)(2), Walser-Reichenbach S(4)(2)(3), Aurbach 
U(5)(6)(2), Becker S(7)(2), Bellmann R(8)(2), Bergmann KC(9)(2)(3), Cornely 
OA(10)(2), Engelhart S(11)(2)(3), Fischer G(12)(2), Gabrio T(13)(2), Herr 
CEW(14)(15)(2)(3), Joest M(16)(2), Karagiannidis C(17)(18)(2), Klimek 
L(19)(2)(3), Köberle M(20)(2)(3), Kolk A(21)(2), Lichtnecker H(22)(2), 
Lob-Corzilius T(23)(2)(3), Mülleneisen N(24)(2)(3), Nowak D(25)(2)(3), Rabe 
U(26)(2)(3), Raulf M(27)(2)(3), Steinmann J(28)(2), Steiß JO(29)(30)(2)(3), 
Stemler J(10)(2), Umpfenbach U(31)(2), Valtanen K(32)(2), Werchan B(33)(2), 
Willinger B(34)(2)(3), Wiesmüller GA(5)(6)(35)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Section for Hygiene in Healthcare Facilities, Division of Infection Control 
and Environmental Hygiene, Cologne Health Department, Cologne.
(2)Co-author.
(3)Member of a scientific medical society, a society or a medical association 
with voting rights.
(4)Formerly: State Agency for Social Services (LAsD) Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel.
(5)Laboratory Dr. Wisplinghoff.
(6)ZfMK - Center for Environment, Hygiene and Mycology Cologne, Cologne.
(7)Department for Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical 
Center Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine I, Medical University of Innsbruck, 
Innsbruck, Austria.
(9)Institute of Allergology Charité, Charité - University Medicine Berlin, 
Berlin.
(10)Institute for Translational Research, CECAD Cluster of Excellence, 
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany and Department I for Internal Medicine, 
Cologne University Hospital, Cologne.
(11)Institute for Hygiene and Public Health, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn.
(12)Baden-Württemberg State Health Office in the Stuttgart Regional Council, 
Stuttgart.
(13)Formerly: Baden-Württemberg State Health Office in the Stuttgart Regional 
Council, Stuttgart.
(14)Bavarian Health and Food Safety Authority, Munich.
(15)Environmental Health and Prevention, Institute and Polyclinic for 
Occupational, Social and Environmental Medicine, University of Munich Hospital 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich.
(16)Allergological-Immunological Laboratory, Helios Lung and Allergy Center 
Bonn, Bonn.
(17)Faculty of Health, Professorship for Extracorporeal Lung Replacement 
Procedures, University of Witten/Herdecke, Witten/Herdecke.
(18)Lung Clinic Cologne Merheim, Clinics of the City of Cologne, Cologne.
(19)Center for Rhinology and Allergology, Wiesbaden.
(20)Department of Dermatology and Allergy Biederstein, School of Medicine, 
Technical University of Munich, Munich.
(21)Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (IFA) of the German Social 
Accident Insurance (DGUV), Unit Biological Agents, Sankt Augustin.
(22)Medical Institute for Environmental and Occupational Medicine MIU GmbH 
Erkrath, Erkrath.
(23)Scientific working group of environmental medicine of the German Society of 
Pediatric Allergology (GPAU).
(24)Asthma and Allergy Center Leverkusen, Leverkusen.
(25)Institute and Polyclinic for Occupational, Social and Environmental 
Medicine, member of the German Center for Lung Research, Hospital of the 
University of Munich, Munich.
(26)Center for Allergology and Asthma, Johanniter Hospital Treuenbrietzen, 
Treuenbrietzen.
(27)Institute for Prevention and Occupational Medicine of the German Statutory 
Accident Insurance, Institute of the Ruhr University Bochum (IPA), Bochum.
(28)Center for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Giessen 
and Marburg GmbH, Giessen.
(29)Specialized Practice in Allergology and Pediatric Pulmonology in Fulda, 
Fulda.
(30)Institute for Clinical Hygiene, Medical Microbiology and Clinical 
Infectiology, Paracelsus Private Medical University Nuremberg Clinic, Nuremberg.
(31)Doctor for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Pediatric Pulmonology, 
Environmental Medicine, Classical Homeopathy, Asthma Trainer, Neurodermatitis 
Trainer, Viersen.
(32)FG II 1.4 Microbiological Risks, German Environment Agency, Berlin.
(33)German Pollen Information Service Foundation (PID), Berlin, Germany.
(34)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Clinical Microbiology - 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, and.
(35)Institute for Occupational, Social and Environmental Medicine, Uniclinic 
RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany.

None.

© Dustri-Verlag Dr. K. Feistle.

DOI: 10.5414/ALX02444E
PMCID: PMC11097193
PMID: 38756207

Conflict of interest statement: See Table 14. Figure 1Incubation period [775, 
778].Figure 2Temporal relationship between sensitization and first allergic 
reaction [775, 778].Figure 3Latency period [775, 778]. Figure 4Annual course of 
the occurrence of mold spores in the outdoor air, spore concentrations as weekly 
values in spores/m3 air, pollen trap in Leverkusen. Source: Mülleneisen 2023, 
unpublished data. A volumetric spore trap based on the Hirst principle was used 
to determine the concentration [269] with associated microscopic analysis of the 
samples. The measurement method is standardized [738].Figure 5Monthly course of 
spore concentrations (in spores/m3 of air) in the outdoor air for several mold 
genera as an example for one year and one measuring station in Germany: a) 
Pleospora 2021 – Berlin measuring station, b) Cladosporium 2021 – Chemnitz 
measuring station, c) Alternaria 2021 – Berlin measuring station, d) Epicoccum 
2021 – Berlin measuring station. Missing data at the Chemnitz station in the 
periods: February 24, 2021 to March 1, 2021 and April 1, 2021 to April 6, 2021. 
The figure was provided by the German Pollen Information Service Foundation 
(Stiftung Deutscher Polleninformationsdienst). The concentration was determined 
using volumetric spore traps based on the Hirst principle [269] followed by 
microscopic analysis of the samples. The measurement procedure is standardized 
[738].Risk matrix 1. Risk of infection by mold (The darker a box, the greater 
the possible health risk.). Risk matrix 2.Risk of sensitization/risk of allergy 
caused by mold (the darker the color, the greater the possible health risk). 
*Proof of the clinical relevance of a sensitization determined in the allergy 
test required! Table 2.Important sources of frequently occurring mold species 
and genera (examples from practical investigations). Species or genusImportant 
sourcesCladosporium herbarum, Alternaria alternata, Botrytis cinereaVegetation, 
outdoor air-associatedAspergillus versicolor complex and Scopulariopsis 
brevicaulisDamp plasterXerophilic Aspergillus species of the Restrictus complex 
(esp. A. penicillioides and A. restrictus) as well as Aspergillus 
glaucus/pseudoglaucus and A. montevidensis, Wallemia sebiCellulose-containing 
materials with only slightly increased moistureAspergillus fumigatusComposting, 
rotting of plant material, indicator for thermotolerant processesChaetomium 
spp., Trichoderma spp., Phialophora spp.Colonizer of damp wood and cellulose 
materials such as cardboardPenicillium speciesPerishable food, waste, organic 
waste and wallpaper, house dustSarocladium strictum, Parengyodontium album, 
Lecanicillium psalliotae and Simplicillium spp.Polystyrene floor insulation with 
prolonged moisture penetrationStachybotrys chartarum, Acremonium spp, Chaetomium 
spp.Very moist, cellulose-containing building materialsWallemia sebi, 
Aspergillus restrictus complexKeeping caged animals with bedding Table 
3.Examples of species complexes based on molecular analyses (modified according 
to [297]). Complex or groupSelected speciesMolecular markers for 
differentiationAspergillus versicolor complexA. versicolor, A. amoenus, A. 
creber, A. jensenii, A. protuberus, et al.CaM, β-TubAspergillus niger complexA. 
niger, A. acidus, A. aculeatus, A. brasiliensis, A. tubingensis, et al.CaM, 
β-TubAspergillus fumigatus complexA. fumigatus, A. lentulus, A. novofumigatus, 
A. fumigatiaffinis, et al.CaM, β-Tub (Note: Cultivation at 37 °C; 
Differentiation A. lentulus)Fusarium solani complexF. solani, F. 
keratoplasticum, F. petroliphilum, F. lichenicola, et al.EF-1α, RPB-1 and/or 
RPB-2 Table 4.Evidence for the relationship between indoor moisture/mold 
exposure and disease (in alphabetical order), modified from [7, 39, 45, 58, 59, 
74, 78, 79, 80, 101, 108,111, 116, 119, 131, 133, 162, 169, 175, 181, 182, 183, 
201, 202, 204, 211, 212, 245, 263, 273, 275, 287, 289, 291, 298, 303, 316, 319, 
322, 338, 363, 370, 394, 437, 442, 444, 445, 449, 450, 451, 462, 465, 466, 467, 
490, 499, 501, 504, 509, 514, 520, 521, 522, 525, 526, 528, 532, 534, 537, 540, 
546, 547, 552, 553, 568, 569, 596, 598, 632, 635, 642, 643, 644, 645, 652, 655, 
694, 698, 717, 722, 742, 746, 754, 756, 757, 777, 783, 790, 791, 794, 797]. 
Causal relationship Sufficient evidence for an association1Allergic 
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) Allergic bronchopulmonary mycoses (ABPM) 
Allergic respiratory diseases Allergic rhinitis Allergic rhinoconjunctivitis 
Aspergilloma Aspergillosis Aspergillus bronchitis Asthma (manifestation, 
progression, exacerbation) Bronchitis (acute, chronic) Community-acquired 
aspergillus pneumonia Favoring respiratory infections Hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis (HP); extrinsic allergic alveolitis (EAA) Invasive aspergillosis 
Mycoses Organic dust toxic syndrome (ODTS) (workplace) Pulmonary aspergillosis 
(subacute, chronic) Rhinosinusitis (acute, chronic invasive or granulomatous, 
allergic)Limited or suspected evidence of an associationAtopic eczema / atopic 
dermatitis / neurodermatitis (manifestation) Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) Mood disorders Mucous membrane irritation (MMI) Odor effects 
SarcoidosisInadequate or insufficient evidence for an associationAcute 
idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage in children Airborne mycotoxicosis Arthritis 
Autoimmune diseases Cancer Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) Endocrinopathies 
Gastrointestinal effects Multiple Chemical Sensitivity (MCS) Multiple sclerosis 
Neuropsychological effects Neurotoxic effects Sudden infant death syndrome Renal 
effects Reproductive disorders Rheumatism Sick building syndrome (SBS) 
Teratogenicity Thyroid diseases Urticaria 1The diseases listed here can be 
subsumed under the term Building Related Illness (BRI), even though BRI requires 
that the etiology, pathology, pathophysiology, diagnosis, treatment, prevention 
and prognosis are clearly known [429, 663]. Table 5.Examples of typical antigens 
and antigen sources for hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP; extrinsic allergic 
alveolitis (EAA) (mod. after Costabel et al. 2020 [113]). AntigenAntigen 
sourceHP typeBacteria   Thermophilic actinomycetesMoldy hay and straw Farmer’s 
lungSugar cane dustBagassosis   Klebsiella oxytocaHumidifierHumidifier lung 
Mycobacteria   Mycobacterium avium complexWhirlpoolsWhirlpool lung (hot tub 
lung)   Mycobacterium immunogenumCooling lubricantsMachinist’s 
lungMushrooms   Absidia corymbiferaMoldy hay and straw Farmer’s 
lung   Trichosporon cutaneumInteriorsSummer-type alveolitis   Penicillium 
roquefortiCheese production/industrial sourcesCheese washer lung 
   Purpureocillium lilacinum, Aspergillus spp. Wind instrumentsWind instrument 
alveolitisAnimal proteins   Feathers and excrementBirdsBird keeper lung   Serum 
and urineRatsRat protein alveolitisPlant proteins   Nut dustTiger nutsTigernut 
alveolitis   Soy dustSoy productsSoy dust alveolitis   Wood dustVarious wood 
dustsWoodworker’s alveolitisEnzymes   PhytaseAnimal feed productionPhytase 
alveolitis   Enzymes from Bacillus subtilisBiological cleaning agentDetergent 
lung Table 6.Diagnostic criteria for allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. a) 
Diagnostic criteria for allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis according to 
Rosenberg et al. [586]:Main criteria:   1. Bronchial asthma    2. Positive 
immediate reaction in the skin test for Aspergillus fumigatus   3. Total IgE > 
417 IU/mL   4. Positive specific IgE against Aspergillus fumigatus   5. IgG 
antibodies against Aspergillus fumigatus   6. Blood eosinophilia (> 1,000 
Eos/µL)   7. Central bronchiectasis   8. Radiological volatile or permanent 
pulmonary infiltratesSecondary criteria   Tough mucus plugs   Positive sputum 
culture for Aspergillus fumigatus   Late reaction in the intradermal test for 
Aspergillus fumigatusb) Modified ISHAM diagnostic criteria for allergic 
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis 2021 [616]:Combination of criteria with best 
sensitivity/specificity:   1. Bronchial asthma   2. Aspergillus 
fumigatus-specific IgE > 0.35 kU/L   3. Total IgE > 500 IU/mLand at least two of 
the following criteria:   1. Aspergillus fumigatus-specific IgG > 27 mgA/dL   2. 
Bronchiectasis in CT thorax   3. Eosinophilia in the blood count > 500/µL Table 
7.Mold mycoses and their pathogens [712]. Infectious disease (invasive 
mycosis)Pathogen (risk group according. TRBA 460 (2016) [712]AspergillosisA. 
fumigatus (2)A. flavus (2)A. niger (complex) (1, 2)A. terreus (2)A. nidulans 
(1)MucormycosisRhizopus oryzae (2)Mucor sp. (1)Rhizomucor 
(1)PhaeohyphomycosesCurvularia sp. (1)Bipolaris sp. (1)Alternaria sp. 
(1)HyalohyphomycosesFusarium sp. (1, 2)Pseudallescheria sp.= Scedosporium sp. 
(2)PenicilliosesTalaromyces (formerly Penicillium) marneffei (2) Table 
8.Differential diagnosis of extrinsic allergic alveolitis (EAA) and organic dust 
toxic syndrome (ODTS) [354]. FeaturesEAAODTSExposureVarious allergensEndotoxins, 
high exposureIncidence2 – 30 / 10,00010 – 100 / 10,000Latency4 – 8 hours4 – 12 
hoursAuscultationEnd-expiratory rales on both sides basalNormal, possibly 
rattling noisesLung functionRestriction (rarely obstruction, DLCO reducedNormal 
(possible restriction)PrecipitinsOften specific IgGMostly negative Table 
9.Immunosuppression risk groups of the Commission for Hospital Hygiene and 
Infection Prevention (KRINKO) at the Robert Koch Institute [349]. Risk group 1 
(moderate immunosuppression/deficiency)– Granulocytopenia < 0.5 × 109 /L; (< 
500/µL) probably up to 10 days (analogous to leukopenia < 1 × 109 /L; < 
1,000/µL), – Autologous stem cell transplantation up to 3 months after day 0 
(day of stem cell return) – Lack of CD4-positive T helper cells < 200/µL 
(Caveat: age-appropriate normal values in children) – Autologous stem cell 
transplantation up to 3 months after intensive therapy phase Patients who have 
more than one characteristic of the immunosuppression/deficiency listed under 
risk group 1 are assigned to risk group 2.Risk group 2 (severe 
immunosuppression/deficiency)– Granulocytopenia < 0.5 × 109 /L (< 500/μL) for 
more than 10 days (analogous to leukopenia < 1× 109 /L; < 1,000/μL) – Severe 
aplastic anemia or macrophage activation syndrome during intensive 
immunosuppressive therapy – Allogeneic bone marrow or stem cell transplantation 
up to 6 months after completion of the intensive therapy phase (important: 
extent of GVHD and ongoing iatrogenic immunosuppression) – Acute inpatient 
treatment phase for autologous stem cell transplantation or after solid organ 
transplantation (until discharge)Risk group 3 (very severe 
immunosuppression/deficiency)– Allogeneic BMT/PBSCT in intensive therapy phase 
(until engraftment = regeneration of granulopoiesis) – Severe GVHD grade III or 
IV under intensive immunosuppression The decision to assign patients after 
allogeneic stem cell transplantation to group 3 is ultimately made by the 
treating hematologist-oncologist after reviewing all findings.GVHD = 
graft-versus-host-disease = graft-versus-host-reaction; BMT = mone marrow 
transplantation; PBSCT = peripheral blood stem cell transplantation. Table 
1.Medline search on the topic of the guideline (as of 12-2014 and 6-2022). 
KeywordsNumber of publications found Status 12-2014 [777]Number of publications 
found Status 6-2022Indoor mo(u)ld or indoor dampness and human 
health1,9493,145Indoor mo(u)ld or indoor dampness and human health and 
allergy1,8753,126Indoor mo(u)ld asthma440805Indoor mo(u)ld health 
asthma285564Indoor mo(u)ld human health asthma494Indoor mo(u)ld 
allergy1,198Indoor mo(u)ld health allergy434774Indoor mo(u)ld human health 
allergy689Indoor mo(u)ld atopy89Indoor mo(u)ld health atopy2459Indoor mo(u)ld 
human health atopy55Indoor mo(u)ld arthritis8Indoor mo(u)ld health 
arthritis4Indoor mo(u)ld human health arthritis3Indoor mo(u)ld rheumatism5Indoor 
mo(u)ld health rheumatism4Indoor mo(u)ld human health rheumatism3Mo(u)ld 
arthritis rheumatism4662Indoor mo(u)ld arthritis rheumatism2Indoor mo(u)ld 
health arthritis rheumatism2Indoor mo(u)ld human health arthritis 
rheumatism1Indoor mo(u)ld infection750Indoor mo(u)ld health infection74435Indoor 
mo(u)ld human health infection357Indoor mo(u)ld irritation113Indoor mo(u)ld 
health irritation4295Indoor mo(u)ld human health irritation85Indoor mo(u)ld 
symptoms1,159Indoor mo(u)ld health symptoms449724Indoor mo(u)ld human health 
symptoms594Indoor mo(u)ld ergosterol50Indoor mo(u)ld health ergosterol2436Indoor 
mo(u)ld human health ergosterol27Indoor mo(u)ld review450Indoor mo(u)ld health 
review301Indoor mo(u)ld human health review160266Indoor mo(u)ld trial67Indoor 
mo(u)ld health trial40Indoor mo(u)ld human health trial1732Indoor mo(u)ld 
clinical diagnosis89194Indoor mo(u)ld health clinical diagnosis113Indoor mo(u)ld 
human health clinical diagnosis93Indoor mo(u)ld diagnostic / 
diagnostics800Indoor mo(u)ld health diagnostic / diagnostics273449Indoor mo(u)ld 
human health diagnostic / diagnostics353Indoor mo(u)ld prevention654Indoor 
mo(u)ld health prevention216433Indoor mo(u)ld human health prevention358Indoor 
mo(u)ld treatment650Indoor mo(u)ld health treatment229360Indoor mo(u)ld human 
health treatment293Indoor mo(u)ld therapy507Indoor mo(u)ld health 
therapy196291Indoor mo(u)ld human health therapy250Indoor mo(u)ld air 
filter174Indoor mo(u)ld health air filter5494Indoor mo(u)ld human health air 
filter55 Table 10.Stage I - IV after conjunctival provocation test (CPT) [235]. 
Stage IForeign body sensation, reddening of the conjunctiva, onset of 
itchingStage IIAs I, plus lacrimation, more intense itching, reddening of the 
conjunctiva tarsi of the lower eyelidStage IIIAs II, additionally reddening of 
the conjunctiva tarsi of the upper eyelid, severe itching, blepharospasmStage 
IVAs III, additionally chemosis, eyelid swelling, irresistible itching Table 
11.Selection of diagnostic methods without sufficient scientific evidence or 
without a medical or scientific basis in environmental medicine [5, 73, 232, 
283, 350, 351, 352, 353, 355, 357, 512, 535, 684]. Diagnostic methods without 
sufficient scientific evidenceStress tests in body mediae.g., molds in the 
bloodAllergological examinationse.g., serial dilution titration, cytotoxic blood 
tests, determination of IgG and IgA antibodies directed against molds in type I 
allergiesInvestigations into disorders of the immune systeme.g., lymphocyte 
stimulation test, determination of lymphocyte subpopulations, determination of 
cytokinesInvestigations of the oxidative systeme.g., determination of oxidative 
stressOphthalmological examinationse.g., visual contrast sensitivity Test (VCS 
test)Diagnostic methods without a medical or scientific basisHolistic or 
bioenergetic diagnostic procedurese.g., electro-acupuncture according to Voll, 
bioresonance procedures, pendulum, Vega test, decoder dermography, biotonometry, 
biotensor, Kirlian photography (plasma print procedure, energetic terminal point 
diagnosis), regulation thermography according to Rost, auriculodiagnostics, 
kinesiology, aurascopy, iris diagnostics“Clinical ecology” proceduree.g., 
cytotoxic blood tests, provocation and neutralization test (PN test) Table 
12.Examples of treatment methods without sufficient scientific evidence or 
without a medical or scientific basis in environmental medicine [5, 73, 160, 
384, 512, 762]. Treatment methods without sufficient scientific evidence 
Antifungal treatment not in line with guidelines Detoxification therapy, e.g., 
with cholestyramine (CSM therapy) Dietary changes Homeopathic treatments 
Symbiosis controlTreatment methods without a medical or scientific basis 
Bioresonance therapy (Moratherapy) Autologous blood and urine treatment Holistic 
intestinal cleansing Salt therapy Clinical ecology procedures (e.g., provocation 
and neutralization test (PN test)) Table 13.Cochrane EBM Review by Sauni et al. 
(2011) [614] on the success of remediation measures after moisture or mold 
damage in relation to asthma and respiratory symptoms as well as the frequency 
of colds in adults and children. MeasureEffect on adultsEffect on childrenHome 
renovation (Evidence level: moderate)Wheezing (asthma): OR 0.64 (KI: 0.55 – 
0.75) Rhinitis: OR 0.57 (CI: 0.55 – 0.66) Acute treatments (mean difference): MD 
–0.45 (KI: –0.76 – –0.14) Table 14.The authors’ declarations of conflicts of 
interest and their assessment are presented below: Consultant or expert 
activityCollaboration in a scientific advisory boardPaid lecturing or training 
activitiesPaid authors or co-author-shipResearch projects / conducting clinical 
studiesProprietary interests (patent, copyright, share ownership)Indirect 
interestsTopics of the guideline affected by COI; classification of the conflict 
of interest (IC) with regard to relevance, consequenceDr. med. Ute 
AurbachNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC Consequence: nonePriv.-Doz. Dr. med. 
Sven BeckerNoYesYesNoYesNoBoard member AeDAClassification: moderate IC; 
consequence: no voting authorization for allergological topicsProf. Dr. med. 
Romuald BellmannYesYesYesNoNoNoMandate holder ÖGMMClassification: moderate IC; 
consequence: no eligibility for antifungal therapyProf. Dr. med. Karl-Christian 
BergmannYesYesYesNoNoNoMandate holder DGPClassification: moderate IC; 
consequence: not eligible to vote on asthma-related issuesProf. Dr. med. Oliver 
A. CornelyYesYesYesNoNoNoNoClassification: moderate IC; consequence: no voting 
rights for mycosis-related topicsProf. Dr. med. Steffen 
EngelhartNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder GHUP and DGKH, Member of the Board 
GHUPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. nat. Guido 
FischerNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. nat. 
Thomas GabrioNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. med. 
Birger HeinzowNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneProf. Dr. 
med. Caroline E.W. HerrNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder and President of the 
GHUPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. nat. Julia 
HurraßNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder and board member of the GHUPClassification: no 
IC; Consequence: noneDr. med. Marcus JoestNoNoYesNoNoNoNoClassification: low IC; 
consequence: no management function (coordination/AG management)Prof. Dr. med. 
Christian KaragiannidisNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot 
specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedClassification: not possible; consequence: 
not entitled to voteProf. Dr. med. Ludger KlimekNoYesYesNoYesNoMandate holder 
AeDAClassification: moderate IC; consequence: no voting rights for 
immunotherapyDr. rer. nat. Martin KöberleNoNoYesNoNoNoMandate holder 
DDGClassification: low IC; consequence: no management function (coordination/AG 
management)Dr. rer. nat. Annette KolkNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot 
specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedClassification: not possible; 
consequence: not entitled to voteDr. med. Dipl.-Chem. Herbert LichtneckerNot 
specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot 
specifiedClassification: not possible; consequence: not entitled to voteDr. med. 
Thomas Lob-CorziliusNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder GPAUClassification: no IC; 
Consequence: noneNorbert MülleneisenNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder 
DGPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneProf. Dr. med. Dennis 
NowakNoNoYesNoNoNoDGAUM and DGP elected representativesClassification: low IC; 
consequence: no management function (coordination/AG management)Dr. med. Uta 
RabeNoNoYesNoNoNoMandate holder AeDAClassification: low IC; consequence: no 
management function (coordination/AG management)Prof. Dr. rer. nat. Monika 
RaulfNoNoYesNoNoNoMandate holder DGAKI and DGAUMClassification: low IC; 
consequence: no management function (coordination/AG management)Prof. Dr. med. 
Jörg SteinmannNoNoYesNoNoNoNoClassification: low IC; consequence: no management 
function (coordination/AG management)Prof. Dr. med. Jens-Oliver 
SteißNoNoYesNoNoNoMandate holder BAPPClassification: low IC; consequence: no 
management function (coordination/AG management)Dr. med. Jannik 
StemlerNoNoYesNoNoNoNoClassification: low IC; consequence: no management 
function (coordination/AG management)Dr. med. Ulli UmpfenbachNoNoNoNoNoNoBoard 
member BAPP, WAPPA, AGAS, FAAKClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. 
nat. Kerttu ValtanenNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot 
specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedClassification: not possible; consequence: 
not entitled to voteDr. rer. nat. Sandra Walser-ReichenbachNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate 
holder GHUPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. medic. Barbora 
WerchanNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneProf. Dr. med. 
Gerhard A. WiesmüllerNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder and Board member 
GHUPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneProf. Dr. med. Birgit 
WillingerNoYesYesNoNoNoMandate holder DMykGClassification: low IC; consequence: 
no management function (coordination/AG management)


2. JAMA. 2024 Feb 13;331(6):510-521. doi: 10.1001/jama.2023.26857.

Management of Food Allergies and Food-Related Anaphylaxis.

Iglesia EGA(1), Kwan M(2), Virkud YV(3), Iweala OI(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee.
(2)Thurston Arthritis Research Center, Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and 
Immunology, Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina School of 
Medicine, Chapel Hill.
(3)University of North Carolina Food Allergy Initiative, Division of Allergy and 
Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina School of 
Medicine, Chapel Hill.

IMPORTANCE: An estimated 7.6% of children and 10.8% of adults have IgE-mediated 
food-protein allergies in the US. IgE-mediated food allergies may cause 
anaphylaxis and death. A delayed, IgE-mediated allergic response to the 
food-carbohydrate galactose-α-1,3-galactose (alpha-gal) in mammalian meat 
affects an estimated 96 000 to 450 000 individuals in the US and is currently a 
leading cause of food-related anaphylaxis in adults.
OBSERVATIONS: In the US, 9 foods account for more than 90% of IgE-mediated food 
allergies-crustacean shellfish, dairy, peanut, tree nuts, fin fish, egg, wheat, 
soy, and sesame. Peanut is the leading food-related cause of fatal and 
near-fatal anaphylaxis in the US, followed by tree nuts and shellfish. The 
fatality rate from anaphylaxis due to food in the US is estimated to be 0.04 per 
million per year. Alpha-gal syndrome, which is associated with tick bites, is a 
rising cause of IgE-mediated food anaphylaxis. The seroprevalence of 
sensitization to alpha-gal ranges from 20% to 31% in the southeastern US. 
Self-injectable epinephrine is the first-line treatment for food-related 
anaphylaxis. The cornerstone of IgE-food allergy management is avoidance of the 
culprit food allergen. There are emerging immunotherapies to desensitize to one 
or more foods, with one current US Food and Drug Administration-approved oral 
immunotherapy product for treatment of peanut allergy.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: IgE-mediated food allergies, including delayed 
IgE-mediated allergic responses to red meat in alpha-gal syndrome, are common in 
the US, and may cause anaphylaxis and rarely, death. IgE-mediated anaphylaxis to 
food requires prompt treatment with epinephrine injection. Both food-protein 
allergy and alpha-gal syndrome management require avoiding allergenic foods, 
whereas alpha-gal syndrome also requires avoiding tick bites.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2023.26857
PMCID: PMC11060332
PMID: 38349368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Iglesia 
reported receiving grants from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation during the 
conduct of the study. Dr Kwan reported receiving grants from Pfizer QI outside 
the submitted work. Dr Iweala reported serving as on the advisory boards of 
Blueprint Medicines and Novartis and receiving consulting fees from Allakos Inc 
outside the submitted work; and was a coauthor of an article sponsored by 
Genentech. No other disclosures were reported.


3. J Ethnopharmacol. 2019 May 10;235:248-254. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.02.014.
Epub  2019 Feb 12.

Aleurites moluccanus and its main active constituent, the flavonoid 
2″-O-rhamnosylswertisin, in experimental model of rheumatoid arthritis.

Quintão NLM(1), Pastor MVD(2), Antonialli CD(3), da Silva GF(3), Rocha LW(3), 
Berté TE(3), de Souza MM(4), Meyre-Silva C(2), Lucinda-Silva RM(4), Bresolin 
TMB(4), Cechinel Filho V(4).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências Farmacêuticas, Universidade do Vale do 
Itajaí (UNIVALI), Itajaí, Santa Catarina, Brazil. Electronic address: 
nara.quintao@univali.br.
(2)Pharmacy Course, Universidade do Vale do Itajaí (UNIVALI), Itajaí, Santa 
Catarina, Brazil.
(3)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências Farmacêuticas, Universidade do Vale do 
Itajaí (UNIVALI), Itajaí, Santa Catarina, Brazil.
(4)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências Farmacêuticas, Universidade do Vale do 
Itajaí (UNIVALI), Itajaí, Santa Catarina, Brazil; Pharmacy Course, Universidade 
do Vale do Itajaí (UNIVALI), Itajaí, Santa Catarina, Brazil.

ETHNOPHARMMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Aleurites moluccana is used in folk medicine to 
treat pain, fever, asthma, hepatitis, gastric ulcer and inflammatory process in 
general, and the nut oil had been topically applied to treat arthritis and other 
joint pain, however the seeds are classified as toxic for oral use.
AIM: Faced with the need for new alternative to treat the symptoms and modify 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) the aim of this work was to evaluate the effects of A. 
moluccanus' leaves dried extract in rats and mice submitted to complete Freund 
adjuvant (CFA)-induced RA.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Wistar Rats and Swiss mice were submitted to CFA-induced 
RA in the right hindpaw. They received A. moluccanus extract (orally; p.o.), 
dexamethasone (subcutaneously), 2″-O-rhamnosylswertisin (p.o.) or vehicle 
(p.o.), from the 14th day after the CFA injection for up to 8 days. The 
mechanical hypersensitivity was evaluated using the von Frey filaments and the 
paw-oedema was measured using a plethysmometer. The rats' injected hindpaw was 
used to perform the histological analysis.
RESULTS: A. moluccanus was able to significantly reduce the mechanical 
hypersensitivity in both ipsi- and contralateral hindpaws of mice injected with 
CFA, in a dose dependent manner. Furthermore, the paw-oedema was progressively 
reduced by A. moluccanus. Similar results were obtained for the positive-control 
drug dexamethasone and the isolated compound 2″-O-rhamnosylswertisin. Besides 
the effects mentioned above, the extract was also effective to repair the joint 
damage in CFA-induced RA rats, including reduction of fibrosis, cartilage 
degradation and bone erosion scores.
CONCLUSION: These results together with the literature data reinforce the 
anti-hypersensitivity and anti-inflammatory activity of A. moluccanus extract. 
Part of the observed effects is due to the presence of the compound 
2″-O-rhamnosylswertisin. The fact that the extract acted as a disease modifier 
point this herbal product as a promisor and safe tool to treat RA and other 
associated chronic diseases.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.02.014
PMID: 30769038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. BMJ. 2017 May 9;357:j1794. doi: 10.1136/bmj.j1794.

The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet, Western diet, and risk 
of gout in men: prospective cohort study.

Rai SK(1)(2)(3), Fung TT(4)(5), Lu N(1)(2), Keller SF(1), Curhan GC(2)(6), Choi 
HK(7)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02114, USA.
(2)Channing Division of Network Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Arthritis Research Canada, Richmond, BC, Canada.
(4)Department of Nutrition, Simmons College, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Nutrition, Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(6)Division of Renal (Kidney) Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02114, USA hchoi@partners.org.

Objective To prospectively examine the relation between the Dietary Approaches 
to Stop Hypertension (DASH) and Western diets and risk of gout (ie, the clinical 
endpoint of hyperuricemia) in men.Design Prospective cohort study.Setting The 
Health Professionals Follow-up Study.Participants 44 444 men with no history of 
gout at baseline. Using validated food frequency questionnaires, each 
participant was assigned a DASH dietary pattern score (based on high intake of 
fruits, vegetables, nuts and legumes, low fat dairy products, and whole grains, 
and low intake of sodium, sweetened beverages, and red and processed meats) and 
a Western dietary pattern score (based on high intake of red and processed 
meats, French fries, refined grains, sweets, and desserts).Main outcome 
measure Risk of incident gout meeting the preliminary American College of 
Rheumatology survey criteria for gout, adjusting for potential confounders, 
including age, body mass index, hypertension, diuretic use, and alcohol 
intake.Results During 26 years of follow-up, 1731 confirmed cases of incident 
gout were documented. A higher DASH dietary pattern score was associated with a 
lower risk for gout (adjusted relative risk for extreme fifths 0.68, 95% 
confidence interval 0.57 to 0.80, P value for trend <0.001). In contrast, a 
higher Western dietary pattern score was associated with an increased risk for 
gout (1.42, 1.16 to 1.74, P=0.005).Conclusion The DASH diet is associated with a 
lower risk of gout, suggesting that its effect of lowering uric acid levels in 
individuals with hyperuricemia translates to a lower risk of gout. Conversely, 
the Western diet is associated with a higher risk of gout. The DASH diet may 
provide an attractive preventive dietary approach for men at risk of gout.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.j1794
PMCID: PMC5423545
PMID: 28487277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors have completed 
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf and 
declare: no support from any organization for the submitted work other than that 
described above; no financial relationships with any organizations that might 
have an interest in the submitted work in the previous three years. HKC reports 
grants from AstraZeneca, consulting fees from Takeda, and consulting fees from 
Selecta outside the submitted work.


5. PLoS One. 2016 Jul 27;11(7):e0159585. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0159585. 
eCollection 2016.

ADAMTS14 Gene Polymorphism and Environmental Risk in the Development of Oral 
Cancer.

Su SC(1)(2), Hsieh MJ(3)(4)(5), Liu YF(6)(7), Chou YE(7)(8), Lin CW(9)(10), Yang 
SF(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Whole-Genome Research Core Laboratory of Human Diseases, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital, Keelung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Drug Hypersensitivity Clinical and Research 
Center, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Cancer Research Center, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan.
(5)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, China Medical University, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, 
Taiwan.
(7)Department of Medical Research, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(8)School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(9)Institute of Oral Sciences, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Dentistry, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung, 
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Oral cancer is a common malignancy that is shown to be causally 
associated with hereditary and acquired factors. ADAMTS14 is a member of the 
ADAMTS (a disintegrin-like and metalloproteinase domain with thrombospondin 
motifs) metalloproteinase family that plays an important role in extracellular 
matrix (ECM) assembly and degradation. Elevation or deficiency of certain ADAMTS 
proteinases has been known to be implicated in a wide range of pathological 
processes including atherosclerosis, arthritis, and cancer. The present study 
aimed to explore the impact of ADAMTS14 gene polymorphisms, combined with 
environmental risks on the susceptibility to oral tumorigenesis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Four single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 
the ADAMTS14 gene, including rs10823607, rs12774070, rs4747096, and rs61573157 
were evaluated from 1200 normal controls and 850 patients with oral cancer. We 
failed to detect a significant association of four individual SNPs with oral 
cancer between case and control group. However, while considering behavioral 
exposure of environmental carcinogens, the presence of four ADAMTS14 SNPs, 
combined with betel nut chewing and/or smoking, profoundly leveraged the risk of 
oral cancer. Moreover, we observed a significant association of rs12774070, 
which is predicted to alter the expression and function of ADAMTS14 by in silico 
and bioinformatics analyses, with poor tumor cell differentiation (AOR: 0.59; 
95% CI: 0.38-0.92; p = 0.02) in patients who chewed betel nuts.
CONCLUSIONS: These results implicate the interaction between ADAMTS14 gene 
polymorphisms and environmental mutagens as a risk factor of oral tumorigenesis 
and suggest a correlation of rs12774070 with the degree of oral tumor cell 
differentiation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0159585
PMCID: PMC4962993
PMID: 27463966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


6. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016 Jan;137(1):137-146. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2015.05.042. Epub 2015 Jul 17.

Distinct transcriptome profiles differentiate nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drug-dependent from nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug-independent food-induced 
anaphylaxis.

Muñoz-Cano R(1), Pascal M(2), Bartra J(3), Picado C(4), Valero A(4), Kim DK(5), 
Brooks S(6), Ombrello M(6), Metcalfe DD(5), Rivera J(7), Olivera A(5).

Author information:
(1)Mast Cell Biology Section, Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Md; Unitat d'Al.lergia, Servei de Neumologia i Al.lergia Respiratoria, 
Hospital Clinic, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Institut 
d'Investigacions Biomediques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain. 
Electronic address: rmunoz@clinic.ub.es.
(2)Institut d'Investigacions Biomediques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain; Servei d'Immunologia, CDB, Hospital Clinic, Universitat de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Spanish Research Network on Adverse Reactions to 
Allergens and Drugs (RIRAAF: Red de Investigacion de Reacciones Adversas a 
Alergenos y Farmacos) of the Carlos III Health Institute, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Unitat d'Al.lergia, Servei de Neumologia i Al.lergia Respiratoria, Hospital 
Clinic, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Institut d'Investigacions 
Biomediques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain; Spanish Research 
Network on Adverse Reactions to Allergens and Drugs (RIRAAF: Red de 
Investigacion de Reacciones Adversas a Alergenos y Farmacos) of the Carlos III 
Health Institute, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Unitat d'Al.lergia, Servei de Neumologia i Al.lergia Respiratoria, Hospital 
Clinic, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Institut d'Investigacions 
Biomediques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Mast Cell Biology Section, Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Md.
(6)Office of Science and Technology and Translational Genetics and Genomics 
Unit, National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md.
(7)Laboratory of Molecular Immunogenetics, National Institute of Arthritis and 
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md.

BACKGROUND: Lipid transfer protein (LTP), an abundant protein in fruits, 
vegetables, and nuts, is a common food allergen in Mediterranean areas causing 
diverse allergic reactions. Approximately 40% of food-related anaphylaxis 
induced by LTPs requires nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) as a 
triggering cofactor.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to better understand the determinants of NSAID-dependent 
and NSAID-independent LTP-induced anaphylaxis (LTP-A).
METHODS: Selection of patients was based on a proved clinical history of 
NSAID-dependent or NSAID-independent anaphylaxis to LTPs, positive skin prick 
test response to LTPs, and serum LTP IgE. Whole-transcriptome (RNA sequencing) 
analysis of blood cells from 14 patients with NSAID-related LTP-A (NSAID-LTP-A), 
7 patients with LTP-A, and 13 healthy control subjects was performed to identify 
distinct gene expression signatures.
RESULTS: Expression of genes regulating gastrointestinal epithelial renewal was 
altered in both patient sets, particularly in those with LTP-A, who also 
presented with gene expression profiles characteristic of an inflammatory 
syndrome. These included altered B-cell pathways, increased neutrophil 
activation markers, and increased reactive oxygen species levels. Increased 
expression of the IgG receptor (CD64) in patients with LTP-A was mirrored by the 
presence of LTP-specific IgG1 and IgG3. Conversely, patients with NSAID-LTP-A 
were characterized by reduced expression of IFN-γ-regulated genes and IFN-γ 
levels, as well as upregulated expression of adenosine receptor 3 (ADORA3) and 
genes related to adenosine metabolism.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene ontology analysis suggests disturbances in gut epithelial 
homeostasis in both groups with LTP-A, with potential integrity breaches in 
patients with LTP-A that might explain their distinct inflammatory signatures. 
Differential regulation in patients with LTP-A and those with NSAID-LTP-A of the 
IFN-γ pathway, IgG receptors, and ADORA3 might provide the pathogenic basis of 
their distinct responses.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.05.042
PMCID: PMC4715677
PMID: 26194548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Ethnopharmacol. 1989 Apr;25(2):159-64. doi: 10.1016/0378-8741(89)90017-2.

Studies on the mechanism of action of Semecarpus anacardium in rheumatoid 
arthritis.

Saraf MN(1), Ghooi RB, Patwardhan BK.

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy, Shreemati Nathibai Damodar Thakarsi Women's University, 
Bombay, India.

Semecarpus anacardium nuts are used for variety of disorders in Ayurveda. A 
chloroform extract of the nut significantly reduced acute carrageenan-induced 
paw oedema in rats and was active against the secondary lesions of 
adjuvant-induced arthritis. Delayed hypersensitivity induced in mice by sheep 
red blood cells as an antigen was potentiated by the extract.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-8741(89)90017-2
PMID: 2747250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]