1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2019 Feb;98(6):e14421. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000014421.

Association between food allergy and ankylosing spondylitis: An observational 
study.

Niu Q(1), Wei W(2), Huang Z(1), Zhang J(1), Yang B(1), Wang L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, West China Hospital.
(2)West China Medical School, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

Food allergies can alter the gut microbiome composition, increasing the risk of 
conditions such as ankylosing spondylitis (AS).To identify the association 
between specific allergens and AS, we investigated the differences in the serum 
levels of 14 food antigen-specific immunoglobulin (Ig) G between AS patients and 
healthy participants. The association between the levels of these antibodies and 
disease activity was assessed by measuring the inflammatory marker C-reactive 
protein (CRP).We enrolled 75 AS patients and 78 healthy controls who had 
undergone antigen-specific IgG tests in West China Hospital between January 2015 
and October 2017, and performed enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays for specific 
IgG against 14 food allergens: rice, egg, mushroom, milk, pork, chicken, beef, 
crab, codfish, corn, soybean, tomato, shrimp, and wheat. The following tests 
were used to analyze differences between AS patients and healthy controls: χ 
test for sex, and a 2-tailed Student t-test or Mann-Whitney U test based on the 
results of Levene test for age and IgG levels. Correlations between IgG and CRP 
levels were calculated using a Spearman's correlation.AS patients had 
significantly higher serum levels of beef-, crab-, and pork-specific IgG than 
did healthy participants. In addition, the serum levels of pork-specific IgG 
were significantly and positively correlated with CRP.These results suggest that 
α-Gal, the predominant natural antigen in mammalian red meat, might play a 
potential role in the pathogenesis of AS, and therefore, AS patients should 
exclude such allergenic foods, including beef, crab and pork, from their daily 
diet.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000014421
PMCID: PMC6380781
PMID: 30732197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.


2. Rheumatol Int. 2006 Apr;26(6):556-60. doi: 10.1007/s00296-005-0018-y. Epub
2005  Jul 16.

General or personal diet: the individualized model for diet challenges in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Karatay S(1), Erdem T, Kiziltunc A, Melikoglu MA, Yildirim K, Cakir E, Ugur M, 
Aktas A, Senel K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Medicine, Atatürk Universitesi Tip Fakültesi Fiziksel 
Tip ve Rehabilitasyon Anabilim Dali, 25240, Erzurum, Turkey. 
skaratay73@hotmail.com

This study was performed to evaluate the effect of individualized diet 
challenges consisting of allergen foods on disease activity in rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) patients. Twenty patients with positive skin prick test (SPT) 
response for food extracts and 20 with negative SPT response were included. All 
patients were instructed to restrict the most common allergen foods during 12 
days and then assigned into two groups according to SPT results. Food challenges 
were performed with all of the allergen foods in prick test positive group 
(PTPG) and with corn and rice in prick test negative group (PTNG) during 12 
days. Allergen foods were then eliminated from PTPG patients' diet, while corn 
and rice were removed in PTNG. Clinical evaluations were performed after fasting 
(baseline), at the end of the challenge phase and reelimination phase. 
Stiffness, pain, physician's and patient's global assessment of disease 
activity, health assessment questionnaire (HAQ), Ritchie's index, serum amyloid 
A protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein were 
determined. All of the disease variables, except HAQ, were increased with food 
challenges in PTPG. In PTNG, no significant change was observed in any of the 
variables except pain (P<0.05) and patient's global assessment (P<0.05). Our 
results showed that the individualized dietary manipulations may effect the 
disease activity for selected RA patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-005-0018-y
PMID: 16025333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2004 Nov;43(11):1429-33. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/keh366. Epub 2004 Aug 10.

The effect of individualized diet challenges consisting of allergenic foods on 
TNF-alpha and IL-1beta levels in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Karatay S(1), Erdem T, Yildirim K, Melikoglu MA, Ugur M, Cakir E, Akcay F, Senel 
K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Atatürk University, 
Erzurum, Turkey. skaratay73@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of individualized diet challenges 
consisting of allergenic foods, defined by the skin prick test (SPT), on tumour 
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) levels in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: Twenty patients with a positive SPT response for food extracts and 20 
with a negative SPT response were enrolled. None of the patients had active 
disease. All patients were fasted for the most common allergenic foods for 12 
days and then allocated to two groups according to SPT results. Food challenges 
were performed with allergenic foods in the prick-positive group (PPG) and with 
corn and rice in the prick-negative group (PNG) for a period of 12 days. Then, 
allergenic foods were excluded from the PPG patients' diet and corn and rice 
were removed from the PNG patients' diet. Clinical examinations were performed 
after fasting (baseline), at the end of the challenge phase and at the end of 
the re-elimination phase. Stiffness, pain, tender and swollen joint counts, 
health assessment questionnaire (HAQ), Ritchie's articular index, erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP) and serum TNF-alpha and 
IL-1beta levels were measured.
RESULTS: TNF-alpha (P < 0.01), IL-1beta (P < 0.05), ESR (P < 0.05) and CRP (P = 
0.001) levels and all of the clinical variables, except HAQ, were increased with 
food challenges in the PPG. These increases were also recorded after the 
re-elimination phase. In the PNG, no significant change was seen in any of the 
variables, except pain (P < 0.05). During the study, important differences were 
observed for most of the variables between the two groups. Thirteen (72%) 
patients in the PPG and three (18%) in the PNG experienced disease exacerbation 
with challenges. This aggravation continued after elimination.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that individualized dietary revisions may 
regulate TNF-alpha and IL-1beta levels in selected patients with RA.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/keh366
PMID: 15304675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Clin Dev Immunol. 2004 Mar;11(1):13-21. doi: 10.1080/10446670410001670445.

Suppression of leukotriene B4 generation by ex-vivo neutrophils isolated from 
asthma patients on dietary supplementation with gammalinolenic acid-containing 
borage oil: possible implication in asthma.

Ziboh VA(1), Naguwa S, Vang K, Wineinger J, Morrissey BM, Watnik M, Gershwin ME.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Department of 
Dermatology, University of California at Davis School of Medicine, TB 192, 
Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Dietary gammalinolenic acid (GLA), a potent inhibitor of 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX) 
and suppressor of leukotriene B4 (LTB4), can attenuate the clinical course of 
rheumatoid arthritics, with negligible side effects. Since Zileuton, also an 
inhibitor of 5-LOX, attenuates asthma but with an undesirable side effect, we 
investigated whether dietary GLA would suppress biosynthesis of PMN-LTB4 
isolated from asthma patients and attenuate asthma. Twenty-four mild-moderate 
asthma patients (16-75 years) were randomized to receive either 2.0 g daily GLA 
(borage oil) or corn oil (placebo) for 12 months. Blood drawn at 3 months 
intervals was used to prepare sera for fatty acid analysis, PMNs for determining 
phospholipid fatty acids and for LTB4 generation. Patients were monitored by 
daily asthma scores, pulmonary function, and exhaled NO. Ingestion of daily GLA 
(i) increased DGLA (GLA metabolite) in PMN-phospholipids; (ii) increased 
generation of PMN-15-HETrE (5-LOX metabolite of DGLA). Increased 
PMN-DGLA/15-HETrE paralleled the decreased PMN generation of proinflammatory 
LTB4. However, the suppression of PMN-LTB4 did not reveal statistically 
significant suppression of the asthma scores evaluated. Nonetheless, the study 
demonstrated dietary fatty acid modulation of endogenous inflammatory mediators 
without side effects and thus warrant further explorations into the roles of GLA 
at higher doses, leukotrienes and asthma.

DOI: 10.1080/10446670410001670445
PMCID: PMC2275406
PMID: 15154607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 1996 Nov;111(3):284-90. doi: 10.1159/000237379.

Anti-inflammatory properties of docosahexaenoic and eicosapentaenoic acids in 
phorbol-ester-induced mouse ear inflammation.

Raederstorff D(1), Pantze M, Bachmann H, Moser U.

Author information:
(1)Department of Vitamin and Nutrition Research, F.Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Basel, 
Switzerland.

Laboratory animal models and clinical studies suggest that dietary n-3 fatty 
acids are beneficial in diseases with an inflammatory component such as 
rheumatoid arthritis or psoriasis. In the present study we investigated the 
effect of purified docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) on 
phorbol ester (TPA)-induced acute inflammation. Mice were fed for 6 weeks a diet 
containing 5% corn oil enriched with either 1% DHA or 1% EPA and compared with a 
group receiving 6% corn oil only. The dietary treatment with DHA or EPA elevated 
the n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids as expected in the spleen and ear 
phospholipids, associated with a reduction in arachidonic acid levels. The 
degree of ear inflammation was quantified by measuring the four parameters 
including (1) edema as the increase in ear biopsy weight, (2) polymorphonuclear 
cell infiltration as myeloperoxidase activity (MPO) at the site of inflammation, 
(3) prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and (4) leukotriene B4 (LTB4) concentrations in ear 
edema. The addition of DHA to the diet reduced significantly the edema formation 
and the MPO activity 24 h after TPA challenge. Both DHA and EPA significantly 
reduced the PGE2 and LTB4 levels compared with animals fed corn oil. This result 
suggests that DHA rather than EPA may be useful in the adjuvant treatment of 
diseases where acute inflammatory processes play a role.

DOI: 10.1159/000237379
PMID: 8917124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 1994 May-Jun;12(3):275-9.

A pilot study of the effect of an elemental diet in the management of rheumatoid 
arthritis.

Haugen MA(1), Kjeldsen-Kragh J, Førre O.

Author information:
(1)Oslo Sanitetsforening Rheumatism Hospital, Norway.

Comment in
    Clin Exp Rheumatol. 1994 May-Jun;12(3):235-9.

To evaluate the extent of food allergy/intolerance in rheumatoid arthritis, an 
elemental (hypoallergenic) diet was studied in a controlled, double-blind pilot 
study. Ten patients were allocated to an experimental group and 7 to a control 
group. The patients in the experimental group received an elemental diet for 3 
weeks, whereas the patients in the control group received a control soup 
consisting of milk, meat, fish, shellfish, orange, pineapples, tomatoes, peas 
and flour of wheat and corn. During the 4th week of the study the patients in 
both groups resumed their regular diet. A significant improvement was found in 
the number of tender joints (p = 0.04) in the experimental group, whereas 
improvement was found in the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (p = 0.03) and 
in the thrombocyte count (p = 0.02) in the control group. Three patients in the 
elemental diet group and 2 patients in the control group improved in all of the 
measured disease variables during the dietary treatment period. There was no 
significant difference in disease activity variables between the two groups. 
These results suggest that some RA patients may respond to the elimination of 
offending food items. However, the results do not encourage treatment with an 
elemental diet in unselected RA patients.

PMID: 8070160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Br J Rheumatol. 1991 Apr;30(2):125-34. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/30.2.125.

Is diet important in rheumatoid arthritis?

Buchanan HM(1), Preston SJ, Brooks PM, Buchanan WW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dietetics, University of Sydney, Royal North Shore Hospital, St 
Leonards, New South Wales, Australia.

Comment in
    Br J Rheumatol. 1991 Aug;30(4):315-6. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/30.4.315.

There is evidence from several well documented case reports that occasional 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) may develop aggravation of their 
arthritis as a result of allergy to some ingredient in the diet. A variety of 
foodstuffs have been implicated including milk and milk products, corn and 
cereals. Total fasting results in improvement in rheumatoid arthritis, but 
appears to be mediated by diminution in production of chemical mediators of 
inflammation, rather than by elimination of a dietary allergen. There is 
conflicting evidence from studies using various intestinal probes that patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis may have a 'leaky' intestinal mucosa allowing food 
allergens to be more easily absorbed. Clinical therapeutic trials of exclusion 
diets have employed the standard strategy of the double-blind randomized method. 
However, this presupposes that patients entered into such a study are capable of 
improvement with dietary manipulation. Since this is often not the case, a more 
appropriate method would be to employ the 'intensive research design' also known 
as 'single case experiment' and 'N of 1' study. 'Masked food intolerance' is an 
attractive hypothesis, but extremely difficult to prove. It is doubtful whether 
fish oils and/or evening primrose oil will be of significant long term benefit 
for patients with RA. However, they do provide for the possibility that a fatty 
acid-like substance may be found which may be incorporated into cell membranes, 
thereby preventing production of mediators of inflammation, such as 
prostaglandin E2 and leukotriene B4.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/30.2.125
PMID: 2012942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed). 1981 Aug 22;283(6290):563. doi: 
10.1136/bmj.283.6290.563.

Rheumatoid arthritis and food: a case study.

Williams R.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.283.6290.563
PMCID: PMC1507909
PMID: 6790079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Acta Allergol. 1948;1(2):227.

Corn sugar as an allergen.

RANDOLPH TG, YEAGER LB.

PMID: 18878627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]