1. JAMA. 2024 Feb 13;331(6):510-521. doi: 10.1001/jama.2023.26857.

Management of Food Allergies and Food-Related Anaphylaxis.

Iglesia EGA(1), Kwan M(2), Virkud YV(3), Iweala OI(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee.
(2)Thurston Arthritis Research Center, Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and 
Immunology, Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina School of 
Medicine, Chapel Hill.
(3)University of North Carolina Food Allergy Initiative, Division of Allergy and 
Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina School of 
Medicine, Chapel Hill.

IMPORTANCE: An estimated 7.6% of children and 10.8% of adults have IgE-mediated 
food-protein allergies in the US. IgE-mediated food allergies may cause 
anaphylaxis and death. A delayed, IgE-mediated allergic response to the 
food-carbohydrate galactose-α-1,3-galactose (alpha-gal) in mammalian meat 
affects an estimated 96 000 to 450 000 individuals in the US and is currently a 
leading cause of food-related anaphylaxis in adults.
OBSERVATIONS: In the US, 9 foods account for more than 90% of IgE-mediated food 
allergies-crustacean shellfish, dairy, peanut, tree nuts, fin fish, egg, wheat, 
soy, and sesame. Peanut is the leading food-related cause of fatal and 
near-fatal anaphylaxis in the US, followed by tree nuts and shellfish. The 
fatality rate from anaphylaxis due to food in the US is estimated to be 0.04 per 
million per year. Alpha-gal syndrome, which is associated with tick bites, is a 
rising cause of IgE-mediated food anaphylaxis. The seroprevalence of 
sensitization to alpha-gal ranges from 20% to 31% in the southeastern US. 
Self-injectable epinephrine is the first-line treatment for food-related 
anaphylaxis. The cornerstone of IgE-food allergy management is avoidance of the 
culprit food allergen. There are emerging immunotherapies to desensitize to one 
or more foods, with one current US Food and Drug Administration-approved oral 
immunotherapy product for treatment of peanut allergy.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: IgE-mediated food allergies, including delayed 
IgE-mediated allergic responses to red meat in alpha-gal syndrome, are common in 
the US, and may cause anaphylaxis and rarely, death. IgE-mediated anaphylaxis to 
food requires prompt treatment with epinephrine injection. Both food-protein 
allergy and alpha-gal syndrome management require avoiding allergenic foods, 
whereas alpha-gal syndrome also requires avoiding tick bites.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2023.26857
PMCID: PMC11060332
PMID: 38349368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Iglesia 
reported receiving grants from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation during the 
conduct of the study. Dr Kwan reported receiving grants from Pfizer QI outside 
the submitted work. Dr Iweala reported serving as on the advisory boards of 
Blueprint Medicines and Novartis and receiving consulting fees from Allakos Inc 
outside the submitted work; and was a coauthor of an article sponsored by 
Genentech. No other disclosures were reported.


2. Dig Dis Sci. 2019 Jul;64(7):1740-1747. doi: 10.1007/s10620-019-05663-x.

Going Against the Grains: Gluten-Free Diets in Patients Without Celiac 
Disease-Worthwhile or Not?

Lerner BA(1), Green PHR(1), Lebwohl B(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Celiac Disease Center, Columbia University Medical 
Center, New York, NY, 10032, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Celiac Disease Center, Columbia University Medical 
Center, New York, NY, 10032, USA. BL114@columbia.edu.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia 
University Medical Center, New York, NY, 10032, USA. BL114@columbia.edu.

While the gluten-free diet (GFD) is the only known effective therapy for celiac 
disease, in recent years it has become increasingly popular in the USA and 
worldwide, with many believing it to be more "healthful" and others claiming 
that it has beneficial effects for health conditions, many extraintestinal, 
other than celiac disease. This review examines the evidence for use of the GFD 
in patients without celiac disease who self-report intestinal and/or 
extraintestinal symptoms (non-celiac gluten sensitivity), as well as for 
enhancement of athletic performance and treatment of autism, rheumatoid 
arthritis, and psychiatric disorders. Overall, the evidence for use of GFDs in 
conditions other than celiac disease is poor. Though non-celiac gluten 
sensitivity may ultimately emerge as a biomarker-defined condition, a large 
proportion of patients with apparent non-celiac gluten sensitivity have, after 
careful investigation, an alternative diagnosis. In light of this, and coupled 
with the potential physical and psychological harms associated with the 
avoidance of gluten, initiating a GFD should not be encouraged for people who 
have these other conditions or are seeking physical/athletic enhancement.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-019-05663-x
PMID: 31102129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Medicine (Baltimore). 2019 Feb;98(6):e14421. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000014421.

Association between food allergy and ankylosing spondylitis: An observational 
study.

Niu Q(1), Wei W(2), Huang Z(1), Zhang J(1), Yang B(1), Wang L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, West China Hospital.
(2)West China Medical School, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

Food allergies can alter the gut microbiome composition, increasing the risk of 
conditions such as ankylosing spondylitis (AS).To identify the association 
between specific allergens and AS, we investigated the differences in the serum 
levels of 14 food antigen-specific immunoglobulin (Ig) G between AS patients and 
healthy participants. The association between the levels of these antibodies and 
disease activity was assessed by measuring the inflammatory marker C-reactive 
protein (CRP).We enrolled 75 AS patients and 78 healthy controls who had 
undergone antigen-specific IgG tests in West China Hospital between January 2015 
and October 2017, and performed enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays for specific 
IgG against 14 food allergens: rice, egg, mushroom, milk, pork, chicken, beef, 
crab, codfish, corn, soybean, tomato, shrimp, and wheat. The following tests 
were used to analyze differences between AS patients and healthy controls: χ 
test for sex, and a 2-tailed Student t-test or Mann-Whitney U test based on the 
results of Levene test for age and IgG levels. Correlations between IgG and CRP 
levels were calculated using a Spearman's correlation.AS patients had 
significantly higher serum levels of beef-, crab-, and pork-specific IgG than 
did healthy participants. In addition, the serum levels of pork-specific IgG 
were significantly and positively correlated with CRP.These results suggest that 
α-Gal, the predominant natural antigen in mammalian red meat, might play a 
potential role in the pathogenesis of AS, and therefore, AS patients should 
exclude such allergenic foods, including beef, crab and pork, from their daily 
diet.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000014421
PMCID: PMC6380781
PMID: 30732197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.


4. Am J Cardiol. 2014 Nov 15;114(10):1621-2. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.08.024. 
Epub 2014 Aug 27.

Gluten sensitivity: new epidemic or new myth? Every major change in our diet 
carries with it the possibility of unforeseen risks.

Nash DT(1), Slutzky AR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York; 
Health Sciences Library, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York.

Fueled in part by recent best-selling books that warn of the evils of gluten in 
our diets, a significant proportion of our population is now either avoiding 
foods that contain gluten or eliminating gluten entirely from their diets, and 
these numbers continue to grow. The gluten-free trend-and the accompanying 
multibillion dollar industry it has created-stems from the spreading belief that 
eating foods containing wheat or other gluten-laden grains may not only result 
in weight gain and obesity but can also lead to a laundry list of ailments 
ranging from depression and anxiety to arthritis and autism. One popular book 
contends that current recommendations for a high-grain, low-fat diet underlie 
much of today's chronic health problems and that a low-carbohydrate, 
high-fat/cholesterol diet is ideal. Every major change in our diet carries with 
it the possibility of unforeseen risks. Concern about the impact of such 
popularized dietary recommendations on overall well-being-and on cardiovascular 
health in particular-warrants discussion in the medical community.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.08.024
PMID: 25261874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Scand J Rheumatol. 2010 Aug;39(4):292-8. doi: 10.3109/03009740903379630.

Self-reported food intolerance and mucosal reactivity after rectal food protein 
challenge in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Lidén M(1), Kristjánsson G, Valtysdottir S, Venge P, Hällgren R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden. 
maria.liden@medsci.uu.se

OBJECTIVES: A dietary link to rheumatoid arthritis (RA) has been suspected and 
an influence on arthritic symptoms by different diets has been reported. Our 
primary aim was to record the self-experienced adverse food reactions in 
patients with RA. A secondary aim was to relate self-experienced adverse 
reactions to dairy produce and wheat to the local mucosal reactivity observed 
after rectal challenge with cow's milk protein (CM) and wheat gluten.
METHODS: A questionnaire about self-experienced adverse reaction to food was 
sent to 347 RA patients. Rectal challenge with CM and gluten was performed in 27 
of these patients and in healthy controls (n = 18). After a 15-h challenge the 
mucosal production of nitric oxide (NO) and the mucosal release of 
myeloperoxidase (MPO) and eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) were measured by 
using the mucosal patch technique.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven per cent of the RA patients reported food intolerance (FI) 
to various foods, and in particular to CM, meat, and wheat gluten. Strong 
mucosal reactivity to CM was observed in 11% of the patients. Moderately 
increased mucosal reactivity to CM and gluten was found in 22% and 33%, 
respectively, of the patients. No relationship was found between 
self-experienced adverse reactions to CM or gluten and mucosal reactivity to 
these proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: Perceived FI is reported frequently by RA patients, with a 
prevalence similar to that reported previously in the general population. 
Mucosal reactivity to CM and gluten is seen in a minor fraction of RA patients 
and is not related to the frequently perceived intolerance to these proteins.

DOI: 10.3109/03009740903379630
PMID: 20141485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Bratisl Lek Listy. 2009;110(8):480-5.

HLA-b27 subtypes in patients with spondylarthropathies, IgE levels against some 
allergens and their relationship to the disease parameters.

Kamanli A(1), Ardicoglu O, Godekmerdan A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 
Firat University, School of Medicine, Elazig, Turkey. akamanli@hotmail.com

In suitable genetic backgrounds, some exogenous and/or endogenous antigens may 
cause SpA. In this study, we investigated HLA B27 subtypes and its relationship 
to some allergens and clinical findings in a group of SpA patients. Forty-eight 
patients (19F, 29M) with SpA (27 with ankylosing spondylitis, 5 with reactive 
arthritis, 15 undifferentiated and 1 with psoriatic arthritis) were included to 
the study. HLA-B alleles have been assessed using the LiPA (Line Probe Assay) 
reverse hybridization principle method. The allergens studied were following: 
egg white, yolk, wheat flour, hot pepper, tomatoes, olive, onion, chicken, black 
tea, sheep cheese, penicillin panel (m1, m25, m28, m30), fungus panel (m1, m2, 
m3, m6), and housemix panel (e1, e2, d1, d2, m2, m3). 59.3% of the patients were 
positive for HLA-B27. Of these patients, 53.6% had B*2702 allele which was the 
most common, followed by B*2708 (21.1%) and B*2701 (10.5%). HLA-B27 was positive 
in 70% of the ankylosing spondylitis patients and 52% had B*2702 subgroup and 
B35 was the most common subgroup among the patients who were HLA-B27 negative. 
Allergic reactions against these 13 allergens were more severe in patients 
HLA-B27 positive. The most frequent allergic reactions were against the onion 
and housemix panel, followed by red pepper, tomatoes, sheep cheese and olive. 
HLA-B*2702 and HLA-B*2701 subgroups had more severe allergic reactions that 
correlated with a disease severity (p < 0.001). These results indicate that 
B*2702 and B*2708 is more frequent in our region in contrast to B*2705 which is 
more commonly found all around the world and that our region represents a 
heterogeneous distribution. IgE levels against some allergen were found higher 
in patients with SpA (Fig. 2, Tab. 5, Ref. 37).

PMID: 19750986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 1994 May-Jun;12(3):275-9.

A pilot study of the effect of an elemental diet in the management of rheumatoid 
arthritis.

Haugen MA(1), Kjeldsen-Kragh J, Førre O.

Author information:
(1)Oslo Sanitetsforening Rheumatism Hospital, Norway.

Comment in
    Clin Exp Rheumatol. 1994 May-Jun;12(3):235-9.

To evaluate the extent of food allergy/intolerance in rheumatoid arthritis, an 
elemental (hypoallergenic) diet was studied in a controlled, double-blind pilot 
study. Ten patients were allocated to an experimental group and 7 to a control 
group. The patients in the experimental group received an elemental diet for 3 
weeks, whereas the patients in the control group received a control soup 
consisting of milk, meat, fish, shellfish, orange, pineapples, tomatoes, peas 
and flour of wheat and corn. During the 4th week of the study the patients in 
both groups resumed their regular diet. A significant improvement was found in 
the number of tender joints (p = 0.04) in the experimental group, whereas 
improvement was found in the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (p = 0.03) and 
in the thrombocyte count (p = 0.02) in the control group. Three patients in the 
elemental diet group and 2 patients in the control group improved in all of the 
measured disease variables during the dietary treatment period. There was no 
significant difference in disease activity variables between the two groups. 
These results suggest that some RA patients may respond to the elimination of 
offending food items. However, the results do not encourage treatment with an 
elemental diet in unselected RA patients.

PMID: 8070160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]