1. JAMA. 2024 Feb 13;331(6):510-521. doi: 10.1001/jama.2023.26857.

Management of Food Allergies and Food-Related Anaphylaxis.

Iglesia EGA(1), Kwan M(2), Virkud YV(3), Iweala OI(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee.
(2)Thurston Arthritis Research Center, Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and 
Immunology, Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina School of 
Medicine, Chapel Hill.
(3)University of North Carolina Food Allergy Initiative, Division of Allergy and 
Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina School of 
Medicine, Chapel Hill.

IMPORTANCE: An estimated 7.6% of children and 10.8% of adults have IgE-mediated 
food-protein allergies in the US. IgE-mediated food allergies may cause 
anaphylaxis and death. A delayed, IgE-mediated allergic response to the 
food-carbohydrate galactose-α-1,3-galactose (alpha-gal) in mammalian meat 
affects an estimated 96 000 to 450 000 individuals in the US and is currently a 
leading cause of food-related anaphylaxis in adults.
OBSERVATIONS: In the US, 9 foods account for more than 90% of IgE-mediated food 
allergies-crustacean shellfish, dairy, peanut, tree nuts, fin fish, egg, wheat, 
soy, and sesame. Peanut is the leading food-related cause of fatal and 
near-fatal anaphylaxis in the US, followed by tree nuts and shellfish. The 
fatality rate from anaphylaxis due to food in the US is estimated to be 0.04 per 
million per year. Alpha-gal syndrome, which is associated with tick bites, is a 
rising cause of IgE-mediated food anaphylaxis. The seroprevalence of 
sensitization to alpha-gal ranges from 20% to 31% in the southeastern US. 
Self-injectable epinephrine is the first-line treatment for food-related 
anaphylaxis. The cornerstone of IgE-food allergy management is avoidance of the 
culprit food allergen. There are emerging immunotherapies to desensitize to one 
or more foods, with one current US Food and Drug Administration-approved oral 
immunotherapy product for treatment of peanut allergy.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: IgE-mediated food allergies, including delayed 
IgE-mediated allergic responses to red meat in alpha-gal syndrome, are common in 
the US, and may cause anaphylaxis and rarely, death. IgE-mediated anaphylaxis to 
food requires prompt treatment with epinephrine injection. Both food-protein 
allergy and alpha-gal syndrome management require avoiding allergenic foods, 
whereas alpha-gal syndrome also requires avoiding tick bites.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2023.26857
PMCID: PMC11060332
PMID: 38349368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Iglesia 
reported receiving grants from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation during the 
conduct of the study. Dr Kwan reported receiving grants from Pfizer QI outside 
the submitted work. Dr Iweala reported serving as on the advisory boards of 
Blueprint Medicines and Novartis and receiving consulting fees from Allakos Inc 
outside the submitted work; and was a coauthor of an article sponsored by 
Genentech. No other disclosures were reported.


2. Postgrad Med J. 2020 Apr;96(1134):190-193. doi: 
10.1136/postgradmedj-2019-136957. Epub 2019 Oct 9.

Hypersensitive adverse drug reactions to glucosamine and chondroitin 
preparations in Australia between 2000 and 2011.

Hoban C(1), Byard R(2), Musgrave I(3).

Author information:
(1)Pharmacology, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, 
Australia claire.hoban@adelaide.edu.au.
(2)Anatomy and Pathology, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, 
Australia.
(3)Pharmacology, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, 
Australia.

PURPOSE OF THE STUDY: This study investigates spontaneous adverse drug reactions 
(ADRs) to glucosamine and chondroitin in the Australian population between 2000 
and 2011, with a primary focus on hypersensitivity reactions.
STUDY DESIGN: Case reports of ADR to glucosamine and chondroitin sent to the 
Therapeutic Goods Administration between 2000 and 2011 were obtained and 
analysed. The demographic information and severity of the ADR were recorded for 
individual ADR cases. These reactions were classified according to the Brown et 
al grading system for generalised hypersensitivity reactions. This included mild 
hypersensitivity reactions (generalised erythema, urticaria and angioedema) 
through to moderate hypersensitivity reactions (wheeze, nausea, vomiting, 
dizziness (presyncope), diaphoresis, chest or throat tightness and abdominal 
pain), and more severe reactions (hypotension, confusion and collapse).
RESULTS: In this study of 366 ADRs to glucosamine and chondroitin preparations, 
71.85% of cases (n=263) were found to have hypersensitivity reactions. Of these 
263 cases, 92 cases were classified as mild (eg, pruritus, urticaria and lip 
oedema), 128 cases classified as moderate (such as dyspnoea, nausea and 
abdominal pain), and 43 cases classified as severe (including amnesia, gait 
disturbance, somnolence and hypotension). It is not clear whether the patients 
involved had a known shellfish allergy or underlying atopy.
CONCLUSION: Results of this investigation support the need for clear labelling 
on glucosamine and chondroitin preparations to raise awareness of possible 
adverse events for those predisposed to allergy or atopy in response to 
shellfish.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/postgradmedj-2019-136957
PMID: 31597786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


3. Medicine (Baltimore). 2019 Feb;98(6):e14421. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000014421.

Association between food allergy and ankylosing spondylitis: An observational 
study.

Niu Q(1), Wei W(2), Huang Z(1), Zhang J(1), Yang B(1), Wang L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, West China Hospital.
(2)West China Medical School, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

Food allergies can alter the gut microbiome composition, increasing the risk of 
conditions such as ankylosing spondylitis (AS).To identify the association 
between specific allergens and AS, we investigated the differences in the serum 
levels of 14 food antigen-specific immunoglobulin (Ig) G between AS patients and 
healthy participants. The association between the levels of these antibodies and 
disease activity was assessed by measuring the inflammatory marker C-reactive 
protein (CRP).We enrolled 75 AS patients and 78 healthy controls who had 
undergone antigen-specific IgG tests in West China Hospital between January 2015 
and October 2017, and performed enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays for specific 
IgG against 14 food allergens: rice, egg, mushroom, milk, pork, chicken, beef, 
crab, codfish, corn, soybean, tomato, shrimp, and wheat. The following tests 
were used to analyze differences between AS patients and healthy controls: χ 
test for sex, and a 2-tailed Student t-test or Mann-Whitney U test based on the 
results of Levene test for age and IgG levels. Correlations between IgG and CRP 
levels were calculated using a Spearman's correlation.AS patients had 
significantly higher serum levels of beef-, crab-, and pork-specific IgG than 
did healthy participants. In addition, the serum levels of pork-specific IgG 
were significantly and positively correlated with CRP.These results suggest that 
α-Gal, the predominant natural antigen in mammalian red meat, might play a 
potential role in the pathogenesis of AS, and therefore, AS patients should 
exclude such allergenic foods, including beef, crab and pork, from their daily 
diet.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000014421
PMCID: PMC6380781
PMID: 30732197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.


4. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 1994 May-Jun;12(3):275-9.

A pilot study of the effect of an elemental diet in the management of rheumatoid 
arthritis.

Haugen MA(1), Kjeldsen-Kragh J, Førre O.

Author information:
(1)Oslo Sanitetsforening Rheumatism Hospital, Norway.

Comment in
    Clin Exp Rheumatol. 1994 May-Jun;12(3):235-9.

To evaluate the extent of food allergy/intolerance in rheumatoid arthritis, an 
elemental (hypoallergenic) diet was studied in a controlled, double-blind pilot 
study. Ten patients were allocated to an experimental group and 7 to a control 
group. The patients in the experimental group received an elemental diet for 3 
weeks, whereas the patients in the control group received a control soup 
consisting of milk, meat, fish, shellfish, orange, pineapples, tomatoes, peas 
and flour of wheat and corn. During the 4th week of the study the patients in 
both groups resumed their regular diet. A significant improvement was found in 
the number of tender joints (p = 0.04) in the experimental group, whereas 
improvement was found in the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (p = 0.03) and 
in the thrombocyte count (p = 0.02) in the control group. Three patients in the 
elemental diet group and 2 patients in the control group improved in all of the 
measured disease variables during the dietary treatment period. There was no 
significant difference in disease activity variables between the two groups. 
These results suggest that some RA patients may respond to the elimination of 
offending food items. However, the results do not encourage treatment with an 
elemental diet in unselected RA patients.

PMID: 8070160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]