1. Clin Nutr. 2025 May;48:134-143. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2025.03.026. Epub 2025 Apr
 5.

Long term impact of formula choice in children with cow milk protein allergy: 
6-year follow-up of the Atopic March Cohort Study.

Nocerino R(1), Bedogni G(2), Carucci L(3), Aquilone G(4), Oglio F(3), Coppola 
S(3), Masino A(3), Berni Canani R(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medical Science, University of Naples "Federico 
II", Naples, Italy; ImmunoNutritionLab at CEINGE Advanced Biotechnologies, 
University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy; Department of Biomedicine and 
Prevention, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy. Electronic address: 
rita.nocerino@unina.it.
(2)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Alma Mater Studiorum-University 
of Bologna, Bologna, Italy; Department of Primary Health Care, Internal Medicine 
Unit addressed to Frailty and Aging, "S. Maria delle Croci" Hospital, AUSL 
Romagna, Ravenna, Italy.
(3)Department of Translational Medical Science, University of Naples "Federico 
II", Naples, Italy; ImmunoNutritionLab at CEINGE Advanced Biotechnologies, 
University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Translational Medical Science, University of Naples "Federico 
II", Naples, Italy.
(5)Department of Translational Medical Science, University of Naples "Federico 
II", Naples, Italy; ImmunoNutritionLab at CEINGE Advanced Biotechnologies, 
University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy; European Laboratory for the 
Investigation of Food-Induced Diseases, University of Naples "Federico II", 
Naples, Italy; Task Force for Microbiome Studies, University of Naples "Federico 
II", Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Cow's milk protein allergy (CMPA) is a significant health 
issue in the pediatric age, carrying lifelong health implications. To compare 
the impact of different formulas on the occurrence of other atopic 
manifestations (AMs), autoimmune disorders (ADs) and the time of immune 
tolerance acquisition in a population of children with immunoglobulin E 
(IgE)-mediated cow CMPA.
METHODS: In a 72-month prospective cohort study the occurrence of other AMs 
(i.e., eczema, urticaria, asthma, and rhinoconjunctivitis), ADs (i.e., celiac 
disease, thyroiditis, type 1 diabetes, inflammatory bowel diseases, idiopathic 
juvenile arthritis) and the time of immune tolerance acquisition were 
comparatively evaluated in IgE-mediated CMPA children treated with different 
formulas: extensively hydrolyzed casein formula containing the probiotic 
L. rhamnosus G (EHCF + LGG), rice hydrolyzed formula (RHF), soy formula (SF), 
extensively hydrolyzed whey formula (EHWF), or amino-acid based formula (AAF).
RESULTS: 313 subjects were evaluated: EHCF + LGG (n = 64), RHF(n = 62), 
SF(n = 63), EHWF(n = 60) and AAF (n = 64). The incidence of AMs was: 
0.30(Bonferroni-corrected 95%CI 0.15 to 0.44) for EHCF + LGG cohort, 0.68 
(0.52-0.83) for RHF cohort, 0.73 (0.59-0.87) for SF cohort, 0.70 (0.55-0.85) for 
EHWF cohort and 0.83 (0.71-0.95) for AAF cohort. The corresponding risk ratios 
are 2.28 (1.51-3.45) for RHF vs. EHCF + LGG (p < 0.001), 2.46 (1.64-3.69) for SF 
vs. EHCF + LGG (p < 0.001), 2.36 (1.56-3.56) for EHWF vs. EHCF + LGG 
(p < 0.001), and 2.79 (1.88-4.13) for AAF vs. EHCF + LGG (p < 0.001). The 
72-month immune tolerance acquisition rate was higher in the EHCF + LGG cohort. 
The incidence of celiac disease was 2/313 (0.006, binomial exact 95%CI 0.0007 to 
0.023). No cases of other ADs were reported.
CONCLUSION: The dietary treatment with EHCF + LGG is associated with lower 
incidence of AMs and higher rate of immune tolerance acquisition in children 
with CMPA.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clnu.2025.03.026
PMID: 40209535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest Roberto Berni Canani have 
had the following relevant financial relationships with the following 
manufacturers: Biostime (research grant), Ch. Hansen (research grant, speaker), 
DBV (research grant), Dr. Schar (research grant), Humana (research grant), 
iHealth (research grant), Kraft-Heinz (research grant, speaker), Mead Johnson 
Nutrition (research grant, speaker), Nestlè (research grant, speaker), Novalac 
(research grant, speaker), Nutricia (research grant, speaker), Sanofi (research 
grant, speaker) as part of publicly funded research projects with the support of 
the Italian Ministry of Health, the Italian Ministry of the University and 
Research, and the EU. The other authors declared that they have no conflicts of 
interest.


2. Allergol Select. 2024 May 3;8:90-198. doi: 10.5414/ALX02444E. eCollection
2024.

AWMF mold guideline "Medical clinical diagnostics for indoor mold exposure" - 
Update 2023 AWMF Register No. 161/001.

Hurraß J(1)(2)(3), Heinzow B(4)(2), Walser-Reichenbach S(4)(2)(3), Aurbach 
U(5)(6)(2), Becker S(7)(2), Bellmann R(8)(2), Bergmann KC(9)(2)(3), Cornely 
OA(10)(2), Engelhart S(11)(2)(3), Fischer G(12)(2), Gabrio T(13)(2), Herr 
CEW(14)(15)(2)(3), Joest M(16)(2), Karagiannidis C(17)(18)(2), Klimek 
L(19)(2)(3), Köberle M(20)(2)(3), Kolk A(21)(2), Lichtnecker H(22)(2), 
Lob-Corzilius T(23)(2)(3), Mülleneisen N(24)(2)(3), Nowak D(25)(2)(3), Rabe 
U(26)(2)(3), Raulf M(27)(2)(3), Steinmann J(28)(2), Steiß JO(29)(30)(2)(3), 
Stemler J(10)(2), Umpfenbach U(31)(2), Valtanen K(32)(2), Werchan B(33)(2), 
Willinger B(34)(2)(3), Wiesmüller GA(5)(6)(35)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Section for Hygiene in Healthcare Facilities, Division of Infection Control 
and Environmental Hygiene, Cologne Health Department, Cologne.
(2)Co-author.
(3)Member of a scientific medical society, a society or a medical association 
with voting rights.
(4)Formerly: State Agency for Social Services (LAsD) Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel.
(5)Laboratory Dr. Wisplinghoff.
(6)ZfMK - Center for Environment, Hygiene and Mycology Cologne, Cologne.
(7)Department for Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical 
Center Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine I, Medical University of Innsbruck, 
Innsbruck, Austria.
(9)Institute of Allergology Charité, Charité - University Medicine Berlin, 
Berlin.
(10)Institute for Translational Research, CECAD Cluster of Excellence, 
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany and Department I for Internal Medicine, 
Cologne University Hospital, Cologne.
(11)Institute for Hygiene and Public Health, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn.
(12)Baden-Württemberg State Health Office in the Stuttgart Regional Council, 
Stuttgart.
(13)Formerly: Baden-Württemberg State Health Office in the Stuttgart Regional 
Council, Stuttgart.
(14)Bavarian Health and Food Safety Authority, Munich.
(15)Environmental Health and Prevention, Institute and Polyclinic for 
Occupational, Social and Environmental Medicine, University of Munich Hospital 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich.
(16)Allergological-Immunological Laboratory, Helios Lung and Allergy Center 
Bonn, Bonn.
(17)Faculty of Health, Professorship for Extracorporeal Lung Replacement 
Procedures, University of Witten/Herdecke, Witten/Herdecke.
(18)Lung Clinic Cologne Merheim, Clinics of the City of Cologne, Cologne.
(19)Center for Rhinology and Allergology, Wiesbaden.
(20)Department of Dermatology and Allergy Biederstein, School of Medicine, 
Technical University of Munich, Munich.
(21)Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (IFA) of the German Social 
Accident Insurance (DGUV), Unit Biological Agents, Sankt Augustin.
(22)Medical Institute for Environmental and Occupational Medicine MIU GmbH 
Erkrath, Erkrath.
(23)Scientific working group of environmental medicine of the German Society of 
Pediatric Allergology (GPAU).
(24)Asthma and Allergy Center Leverkusen, Leverkusen.
(25)Institute and Polyclinic for Occupational, Social and Environmental 
Medicine, member of the German Center for Lung Research, Hospital of the 
University of Munich, Munich.
(26)Center for Allergology and Asthma, Johanniter Hospital Treuenbrietzen, 
Treuenbrietzen.
(27)Institute for Prevention and Occupational Medicine of the German Statutory 
Accident Insurance, Institute of the Ruhr University Bochum (IPA), Bochum.
(28)Center for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Giessen 
and Marburg GmbH, Giessen.
(29)Specialized Practice in Allergology and Pediatric Pulmonology in Fulda, 
Fulda.
(30)Institute for Clinical Hygiene, Medical Microbiology and Clinical 
Infectiology, Paracelsus Private Medical University Nuremberg Clinic, Nuremberg.
(31)Doctor for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Pediatric Pulmonology, 
Environmental Medicine, Classical Homeopathy, Asthma Trainer, Neurodermatitis 
Trainer, Viersen.
(32)FG II 1.4 Microbiological Risks, German Environment Agency, Berlin.
(33)German Pollen Information Service Foundation (PID), Berlin, Germany.
(34)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Clinical Microbiology - 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, and.
(35)Institute for Occupational, Social and Environmental Medicine, Uniclinic 
RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany.

None.

© Dustri-Verlag Dr. K. Feistle.

DOI: 10.5414/ALX02444E
PMCID: PMC11097193
PMID: 38756207

Conflict of interest statement: See Table 14. Figure 1Incubation period [775, 
778].Figure 2Temporal relationship between sensitization and first allergic 
reaction [775, 778].Figure 3Latency period [775, 778]. Figure 4Annual course of 
the occurrence of mold spores in the outdoor air, spore concentrations as weekly 
values in spores/m3 air, pollen trap in Leverkusen. Source: Mülleneisen 2023, 
unpublished data. A volumetric spore trap based on the Hirst principle was used 
to determine the concentration [269] with associated microscopic analysis of the 
samples. The measurement method is standardized [738].Figure 5Monthly course of 
spore concentrations (in spores/m3 of air) in the outdoor air for several mold 
genera as an example for one year and one measuring station in Germany: a) 
Pleospora 2021 – Berlin measuring station, b) Cladosporium 2021 – Chemnitz 
measuring station, c) Alternaria 2021 – Berlin measuring station, d) Epicoccum 
2021 – Berlin measuring station. Missing data at the Chemnitz station in the 
periods: February 24, 2021 to March 1, 2021 and April 1, 2021 to April 6, 2021. 
The figure was provided by the German Pollen Information Service Foundation 
(Stiftung Deutscher Polleninformationsdienst). The concentration was determined 
using volumetric spore traps based on the Hirst principle [269] followed by 
microscopic analysis of the samples. The measurement procedure is standardized 
[738].Risk matrix 1. Risk of infection by mold (The darker a box, the greater 
the possible health risk.). Risk matrix 2.Risk of sensitization/risk of allergy 
caused by mold (the darker the color, the greater the possible health risk). 
*Proof of the clinical relevance of a sensitization determined in the allergy 
test required! Table 2.Important sources of frequently occurring mold species 
and genera (examples from practical investigations). Species or genusImportant 
sourcesCladosporium herbarum, Alternaria alternata, Botrytis cinereaVegetation, 
outdoor air-associatedAspergillus versicolor complex and Scopulariopsis 
brevicaulisDamp plasterXerophilic Aspergillus species of the Restrictus complex 
(esp. A. penicillioides and A. restrictus) as well as Aspergillus 
glaucus/pseudoglaucus and A. montevidensis, Wallemia sebiCellulose-containing 
materials with only slightly increased moistureAspergillus fumigatusComposting, 
rotting of plant material, indicator for thermotolerant processesChaetomium 
spp., Trichoderma spp., Phialophora spp.Colonizer of damp wood and cellulose 
materials such as cardboardPenicillium speciesPerishable food, waste, organic 
waste and wallpaper, house dustSarocladium strictum, Parengyodontium album, 
Lecanicillium psalliotae and Simplicillium spp.Polystyrene floor insulation with 
prolonged moisture penetrationStachybotrys chartarum, Acremonium spp, Chaetomium 
spp.Very moist, cellulose-containing building materialsWallemia sebi, 
Aspergillus restrictus complexKeeping caged animals with bedding Table 
3.Examples of species complexes based on molecular analyses (modified according 
to [297]). Complex or groupSelected speciesMolecular markers for 
differentiationAspergillus versicolor complexA. versicolor, A. amoenus, A. 
creber, A. jensenii, A. protuberus, et al.CaM, β-TubAspergillus niger complexA. 
niger, A. acidus, A. aculeatus, A. brasiliensis, A. tubingensis, et al.CaM, 
β-TubAspergillus fumigatus complexA. fumigatus, A. lentulus, A. novofumigatus, 
A. fumigatiaffinis, et al.CaM, β-Tub (Note: Cultivation at 37 °C; 
Differentiation A. lentulus)Fusarium solani complexF. solani, F. 
keratoplasticum, F. petroliphilum, F. lichenicola, et al.EF-1α, RPB-1 and/or 
RPB-2 Table 4.Evidence for the relationship between indoor moisture/mold 
exposure and disease (in alphabetical order), modified from [7, 39, 45, 58, 59, 
74, 78, 79, 80, 101, 108,111, 116, 119, 131, 133, 162, 169, 175, 181, 182, 183, 
201, 202, 204, 211, 212, 245, 263, 273, 275, 287, 289, 291, 298, 303, 316, 319, 
322, 338, 363, 370, 394, 437, 442, 444, 445, 449, 450, 451, 462, 465, 466, 467, 
490, 499, 501, 504, 509, 514, 520, 521, 522, 525, 526, 528, 532, 534, 537, 540, 
546, 547, 552, 553, 568, 569, 596, 598, 632, 635, 642, 643, 644, 645, 652, 655, 
694, 698, 717, 722, 742, 746, 754, 756, 757, 777, 783, 790, 791, 794, 797]. 
Causal relationship Sufficient evidence for an association1Allergic 
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) Allergic bronchopulmonary mycoses (ABPM) 
Allergic respiratory diseases Allergic rhinitis Allergic rhinoconjunctivitis 
Aspergilloma Aspergillosis Aspergillus bronchitis Asthma (manifestation, 
progression, exacerbation) Bronchitis (acute, chronic) Community-acquired 
aspergillus pneumonia Favoring respiratory infections Hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis (HP); extrinsic allergic alveolitis (EAA) Invasive aspergillosis 
Mycoses Organic dust toxic syndrome (ODTS) (workplace) Pulmonary aspergillosis 
(subacute, chronic) Rhinosinusitis (acute, chronic invasive or granulomatous, 
allergic)Limited or suspected evidence of an associationAtopic eczema / atopic 
dermatitis / neurodermatitis (manifestation) Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) Mood disorders Mucous membrane irritation (MMI) Odor effects 
SarcoidosisInadequate or insufficient evidence for an associationAcute 
idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage in children Airborne mycotoxicosis Arthritis 
Autoimmune diseases Cancer Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) Endocrinopathies 
Gastrointestinal effects Multiple Chemical Sensitivity (MCS) Multiple sclerosis 
Neuropsychological effects Neurotoxic effects Sudden infant death syndrome Renal 
effects Reproductive disorders Rheumatism Sick building syndrome (SBS) 
Teratogenicity Thyroid diseases Urticaria 1The diseases listed here can be 
subsumed under the term Building Related Illness (BRI), even though BRI requires 
that the etiology, pathology, pathophysiology, diagnosis, treatment, prevention 
and prognosis are clearly known [429, 663]. Table 5.Examples of typical antigens 
and antigen sources for hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP; extrinsic allergic 
alveolitis (EAA) (mod. after Costabel et al. 2020 [113]). AntigenAntigen 
sourceHP typeBacteria   Thermophilic actinomycetesMoldy hay and straw Farmer’s 
lungSugar cane dustBagassosis   Klebsiella oxytocaHumidifierHumidifier lung 
Mycobacteria   Mycobacterium avium complexWhirlpoolsWhirlpool lung (hot tub 
lung)   Mycobacterium immunogenumCooling lubricantsMachinist’s 
lungMushrooms   Absidia corymbiferaMoldy hay and straw Farmer’s 
lung   Trichosporon cutaneumInteriorsSummer-type alveolitis   Penicillium 
roquefortiCheese production/industrial sourcesCheese washer lung 
   Purpureocillium lilacinum, Aspergillus spp. Wind instrumentsWind instrument 
alveolitisAnimal proteins   Feathers and excrementBirdsBird keeper lung   Serum 
and urineRatsRat protein alveolitisPlant proteins   Nut dustTiger nutsTigernut 
alveolitis   Soy dustSoy productsSoy dust alveolitis   Wood dustVarious wood 
dustsWoodworker’s alveolitisEnzymes   PhytaseAnimal feed productionPhytase 
alveolitis   Enzymes from Bacillus subtilisBiological cleaning agentDetergent 
lung Table 6.Diagnostic criteria for allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. a) 
Diagnostic criteria for allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis according to 
Rosenberg et al. [586]:Main criteria:   1. Bronchial asthma    2. Positive 
immediate reaction in the skin test for Aspergillus fumigatus   3. Total IgE > 
417 IU/mL   4. Positive specific IgE against Aspergillus fumigatus   5. IgG 
antibodies against Aspergillus fumigatus   6. Blood eosinophilia (> 1,000 
Eos/µL)   7. Central bronchiectasis   8. Radiological volatile or permanent 
pulmonary infiltratesSecondary criteria   Tough mucus plugs   Positive sputum 
culture for Aspergillus fumigatus   Late reaction in the intradermal test for 
Aspergillus fumigatusb) Modified ISHAM diagnostic criteria for allergic 
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis 2021 [616]:Combination of criteria with best 
sensitivity/specificity:   1. Bronchial asthma   2. Aspergillus 
fumigatus-specific IgE > 0.35 kU/L   3. Total IgE > 500 IU/mLand at least two of 
the following criteria:   1. Aspergillus fumigatus-specific IgG > 27 mgA/dL   2. 
Bronchiectasis in CT thorax   3. Eosinophilia in the blood count > 500/µL Table 
7.Mold mycoses and their pathogens [712]. Infectious disease (invasive 
mycosis)Pathogen (risk group according. TRBA 460 (2016) [712]AspergillosisA. 
fumigatus (2)A. flavus (2)A. niger (complex) (1, 2)A. terreus (2)A. nidulans 
(1)MucormycosisRhizopus oryzae (2)Mucor sp. (1)Rhizomucor 
(1)PhaeohyphomycosesCurvularia sp. (1)Bipolaris sp. (1)Alternaria sp. 
(1)HyalohyphomycosesFusarium sp. (1, 2)Pseudallescheria sp.= Scedosporium sp. 
(2)PenicilliosesTalaromyces (formerly Penicillium) marneffei (2) Table 
8.Differential diagnosis of extrinsic allergic alveolitis (EAA) and organic dust 
toxic syndrome (ODTS) [354]. FeaturesEAAODTSExposureVarious allergensEndotoxins, 
high exposureIncidence2 – 30 / 10,00010 – 100 / 10,000Latency4 – 8 hours4 – 12 
hoursAuscultationEnd-expiratory rales on both sides basalNormal, possibly 
rattling noisesLung functionRestriction (rarely obstruction, DLCO reducedNormal 
(possible restriction)PrecipitinsOften specific IgGMostly negative Table 
9.Immunosuppression risk groups of the Commission for Hospital Hygiene and 
Infection Prevention (KRINKO) at the Robert Koch Institute [349]. Risk group 1 
(moderate immunosuppression/deficiency)– Granulocytopenia < 0.5 × 109 /L; (< 
500/µL) probably up to 10 days (analogous to leukopenia < 1 × 109 /L; < 
1,000/µL), – Autologous stem cell transplantation up to 3 months after day 0 
(day of stem cell return) – Lack of CD4-positive T helper cells < 200/µL 
(Caveat: age-appropriate normal values in children) – Autologous stem cell 
transplantation up to 3 months after intensive therapy phase Patients who have 
more than one characteristic of the immunosuppression/deficiency listed under 
risk group 1 are assigned to risk group 2.Risk group 2 (severe 
immunosuppression/deficiency)– Granulocytopenia < 0.5 × 109 /L (< 500/μL) for 
more than 10 days (analogous to leukopenia < 1× 109 /L; < 1,000/μL) – Severe 
aplastic anemia or macrophage activation syndrome during intensive 
immunosuppressive therapy – Allogeneic bone marrow or stem cell transplantation 
up to 6 months after completion of the intensive therapy phase (important: 
extent of GVHD and ongoing iatrogenic immunosuppression) – Acute inpatient 
treatment phase for autologous stem cell transplantation or after solid organ 
transplantation (until discharge)Risk group 3 (very severe 
immunosuppression/deficiency)– Allogeneic BMT/PBSCT in intensive therapy phase 
(until engraftment = regeneration of granulopoiesis) – Severe GVHD grade III or 
IV under intensive immunosuppression The decision to assign patients after 
allogeneic stem cell transplantation to group 3 is ultimately made by the 
treating hematologist-oncologist after reviewing all findings.GVHD = 
graft-versus-host-disease = graft-versus-host-reaction; BMT = mone marrow 
transplantation; PBSCT = peripheral blood stem cell transplantation. Table 
1.Medline search on the topic of the guideline (as of 12-2014 and 6-2022). 
KeywordsNumber of publications found Status 12-2014 [777]Number of publications 
found Status 6-2022Indoor mo(u)ld or indoor dampness and human 
health1,9493,145Indoor mo(u)ld or indoor dampness and human health and 
allergy1,8753,126Indoor mo(u)ld asthma440805Indoor mo(u)ld health 
asthma285564Indoor mo(u)ld human health asthma494Indoor mo(u)ld 
allergy1,198Indoor mo(u)ld health allergy434774Indoor mo(u)ld human health 
allergy689Indoor mo(u)ld atopy89Indoor mo(u)ld health atopy2459Indoor mo(u)ld 
human health atopy55Indoor mo(u)ld arthritis8Indoor mo(u)ld health 
arthritis4Indoor mo(u)ld human health arthritis3Indoor mo(u)ld rheumatism5Indoor 
mo(u)ld health rheumatism4Indoor mo(u)ld human health rheumatism3Mo(u)ld 
arthritis rheumatism4662Indoor mo(u)ld arthritis rheumatism2Indoor mo(u)ld 
health arthritis rheumatism2Indoor mo(u)ld human health arthritis 
rheumatism1Indoor mo(u)ld infection750Indoor mo(u)ld health infection74435Indoor 
mo(u)ld human health infection357Indoor mo(u)ld irritation113Indoor mo(u)ld 
health irritation4295Indoor mo(u)ld human health irritation85Indoor mo(u)ld 
symptoms1,159Indoor mo(u)ld health symptoms449724Indoor mo(u)ld human health 
symptoms594Indoor mo(u)ld ergosterol50Indoor mo(u)ld health ergosterol2436Indoor 
mo(u)ld human health ergosterol27Indoor mo(u)ld review450Indoor mo(u)ld health 
review301Indoor mo(u)ld human health review160266Indoor mo(u)ld trial67Indoor 
mo(u)ld health trial40Indoor mo(u)ld human health trial1732Indoor mo(u)ld 
clinical diagnosis89194Indoor mo(u)ld health clinical diagnosis113Indoor mo(u)ld 
human health clinical diagnosis93Indoor mo(u)ld diagnostic / 
diagnostics800Indoor mo(u)ld health diagnostic / diagnostics273449Indoor mo(u)ld 
human health diagnostic / diagnostics353Indoor mo(u)ld prevention654Indoor 
mo(u)ld health prevention216433Indoor mo(u)ld human health prevention358Indoor 
mo(u)ld treatment650Indoor mo(u)ld health treatment229360Indoor mo(u)ld human 
health treatment293Indoor mo(u)ld therapy507Indoor mo(u)ld health 
therapy196291Indoor mo(u)ld human health therapy250Indoor mo(u)ld air 
filter174Indoor mo(u)ld health air filter5494Indoor mo(u)ld human health air 
filter55 Table 10.Stage I - IV after conjunctival provocation test (CPT) [235]. 
Stage IForeign body sensation, reddening of the conjunctiva, onset of 
itchingStage IIAs I, plus lacrimation, more intense itching, reddening of the 
conjunctiva tarsi of the lower eyelidStage IIIAs II, additionally reddening of 
the conjunctiva tarsi of the upper eyelid, severe itching, blepharospasmStage 
IVAs III, additionally chemosis, eyelid swelling, irresistible itching Table 
11.Selection of diagnostic methods without sufficient scientific evidence or 
without a medical or scientific basis in environmental medicine [5, 73, 232, 
283, 350, 351, 352, 353, 355, 357, 512, 535, 684]. Diagnostic methods without 
sufficient scientific evidenceStress tests in body mediae.g., molds in the 
bloodAllergological examinationse.g., serial dilution titration, cytotoxic blood 
tests, determination of IgG and IgA antibodies directed against molds in type I 
allergiesInvestigations into disorders of the immune systeme.g., lymphocyte 
stimulation test, determination of lymphocyte subpopulations, determination of 
cytokinesInvestigations of the oxidative systeme.g., determination of oxidative 
stressOphthalmological examinationse.g., visual contrast sensitivity Test (VCS 
test)Diagnostic methods without a medical or scientific basisHolistic or 
bioenergetic diagnostic procedurese.g., electro-acupuncture according to Voll, 
bioresonance procedures, pendulum, Vega test, decoder dermography, biotonometry, 
biotensor, Kirlian photography (plasma print procedure, energetic terminal point 
diagnosis), regulation thermography according to Rost, auriculodiagnostics, 
kinesiology, aurascopy, iris diagnostics“Clinical ecology” proceduree.g., 
cytotoxic blood tests, provocation and neutralization test (PN test) Table 
12.Examples of treatment methods without sufficient scientific evidence or 
without a medical or scientific basis in environmental medicine [5, 73, 160, 
384, 512, 762]. Treatment methods without sufficient scientific evidence 
Antifungal treatment not in line with guidelines Detoxification therapy, e.g., 
with cholestyramine (CSM therapy) Dietary changes Homeopathic treatments 
Symbiosis controlTreatment methods without a medical or scientific basis 
Bioresonance therapy (Moratherapy) Autologous blood and urine treatment Holistic 
intestinal cleansing Salt therapy Clinical ecology procedures (e.g., provocation 
and neutralization test (PN test)) Table 13.Cochrane EBM Review by Sauni et al. 
(2011) [614] on the success of remediation measures after moisture or mold 
damage in relation to asthma and respiratory symptoms as well as the frequency 
of colds in adults and children. MeasureEffect on adultsEffect on childrenHome 
renovation (Evidence level: moderate)Wheezing (asthma): OR 0.64 (KI: 0.55 – 
0.75) Rhinitis: OR 0.57 (CI: 0.55 – 0.66) Acute treatments (mean difference): MD 
–0.45 (KI: –0.76 – –0.14) Table 14.The authors’ declarations of conflicts of 
interest and their assessment are presented below: Consultant or expert 
activityCollaboration in a scientific advisory boardPaid lecturing or training 
activitiesPaid authors or co-author-shipResearch projects / conducting clinical 
studiesProprietary interests (patent, copyright, share ownership)Indirect 
interestsTopics of the guideline affected by COI; classification of the conflict 
of interest (IC) with regard to relevance, consequenceDr. med. Ute 
AurbachNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC Consequence: nonePriv.-Doz. Dr. med. 
Sven BeckerNoYesYesNoYesNoBoard member AeDAClassification: moderate IC; 
consequence: no voting authorization for allergological topicsProf. Dr. med. 
Romuald BellmannYesYesYesNoNoNoMandate holder ÖGMMClassification: moderate IC; 
consequence: no eligibility for antifungal therapyProf. Dr. med. Karl-Christian 
BergmannYesYesYesNoNoNoMandate holder DGPClassification: moderate IC; 
consequence: not eligible to vote on asthma-related issuesProf. Dr. med. Oliver 
A. CornelyYesYesYesNoNoNoNoClassification: moderate IC; consequence: no voting 
rights for mycosis-related topicsProf. Dr. med. Steffen 
EngelhartNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder GHUP and DGKH, Member of the Board 
GHUPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. nat. Guido 
FischerNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. nat. 
Thomas GabrioNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. med. 
Birger HeinzowNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneProf. Dr. 
med. Caroline E.W. HerrNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder and President of the 
GHUPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. nat. Julia 
HurraßNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder and board member of the GHUPClassification: no 
IC; Consequence: noneDr. med. Marcus JoestNoNoYesNoNoNoNoClassification: low IC; 
consequence: no management function (coordination/AG management)Prof. Dr. med. 
Christian KaragiannidisNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot 
specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedClassification: not possible; consequence: 
not entitled to voteProf. Dr. med. Ludger KlimekNoYesYesNoYesNoMandate holder 
AeDAClassification: moderate IC; consequence: no voting rights for 
immunotherapyDr. rer. nat. Martin KöberleNoNoYesNoNoNoMandate holder 
DDGClassification: low IC; consequence: no management function (coordination/AG 
management)Dr. rer. nat. Annette KolkNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot 
specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedClassification: not possible; 
consequence: not entitled to voteDr. med. Dipl.-Chem. Herbert LichtneckerNot 
specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot 
specifiedClassification: not possible; consequence: not entitled to voteDr. med. 
Thomas Lob-CorziliusNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder GPAUClassification: no IC; 
Consequence: noneNorbert MülleneisenNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder 
DGPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneProf. Dr. med. Dennis 
NowakNoNoYesNoNoNoDGAUM and DGP elected representativesClassification: low IC; 
consequence: no management function (coordination/AG management)Dr. med. Uta 
RabeNoNoYesNoNoNoMandate holder AeDAClassification: low IC; consequence: no 
management function (coordination/AG management)Prof. Dr. rer. nat. Monika 
RaulfNoNoYesNoNoNoMandate holder DGAKI and DGAUMClassification: low IC; 
consequence: no management function (coordination/AG management)Prof. Dr. med. 
Jörg SteinmannNoNoYesNoNoNoNoClassification: low IC; consequence: no management 
function (coordination/AG management)Prof. Dr. med. Jens-Oliver 
SteißNoNoYesNoNoNoMandate holder BAPPClassification: low IC; consequence: no 
management function (coordination/AG management)Dr. med. Jannik 
StemlerNoNoYesNoNoNoNoClassification: low IC; consequence: no management 
function (coordination/AG management)Dr. med. Ulli UmpfenbachNoNoNoNoNoNoBoard 
member BAPP, WAPPA, AGAS, FAAKClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. 
nat. Kerttu ValtanenNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot 
specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedClassification: not possible; consequence: 
not entitled to voteDr. rer. nat. Sandra Walser-ReichenbachNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate 
holder GHUPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. medic. Barbora 
WerchanNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneProf. Dr. med. 
Gerhard A. WiesmüllerNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder and Board member 
GHUPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneProf. Dr. med. Birgit 
WillingerNoYesYesNoNoNoMandate holder DMykGClassification: low IC; consequence: 
no management function (coordination/AG management)


3. JAMA. 2024 Feb 13;331(6):510-521. doi: 10.1001/jama.2023.26857.

Management of Food Allergies and Food-Related Anaphylaxis.

Iglesia EGA(1), Kwan M(2), Virkud YV(3), Iweala OI(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee.
(2)Thurston Arthritis Research Center, Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and 
Immunology, Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina School of 
Medicine, Chapel Hill.
(3)University of North Carolina Food Allergy Initiative, Division of Allergy and 
Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina School of 
Medicine, Chapel Hill.

IMPORTANCE: An estimated 7.6% of children and 10.8% of adults have IgE-mediated 
food-protein allergies in the US. IgE-mediated food allergies may cause 
anaphylaxis and death. A delayed, IgE-mediated allergic response to the 
food-carbohydrate galactose-α-1,3-galactose (alpha-gal) in mammalian meat 
affects an estimated 96 000 to 450 000 individuals in the US and is currently a 
leading cause of food-related anaphylaxis in adults.
OBSERVATIONS: In the US, 9 foods account for more than 90% of IgE-mediated food 
allergies-crustacean shellfish, dairy, peanut, tree nuts, fin fish, egg, wheat, 
soy, and sesame. Peanut is the leading food-related cause of fatal and 
near-fatal anaphylaxis in the US, followed by tree nuts and shellfish. The 
fatality rate from anaphylaxis due to food in the US is estimated to be 0.04 per 
million per year. Alpha-gal syndrome, which is associated with tick bites, is a 
rising cause of IgE-mediated food anaphylaxis. The seroprevalence of 
sensitization to alpha-gal ranges from 20% to 31% in the southeastern US. 
Self-injectable epinephrine is the first-line treatment for food-related 
anaphylaxis. The cornerstone of IgE-food allergy management is avoidance of the 
culprit food allergen. There are emerging immunotherapies to desensitize to one 
or more foods, with one current US Food and Drug Administration-approved oral 
immunotherapy product for treatment of peanut allergy.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: IgE-mediated food allergies, including delayed 
IgE-mediated allergic responses to red meat in alpha-gal syndrome, are common in 
the US, and may cause anaphylaxis and rarely, death. IgE-mediated anaphylaxis to 
food requires prompt treatment with epinephrine injection. Both food-protein 
allergy and alpha-gal syndrome management require avoiding allergenic foods, 
whereas alpha-gal syndrome also requires avoiding tick bites.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2023.26857
PMCID: PMC11060332
PMID: 38349368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Iglesia 
reported receiving grants from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation during the 
conduct of the study. Dr Kwan reported receiving grants from Pfizer QI outside 
the submitted work. Dr Iweala reported serving as on the advisory boards of 
Blueprint Medicines and Novartis and receiving consulting fees from Allakos Inc 
outside the submitted work; and was a coauthor of an article sponsored by 
Genentech. No other disclosures were reported.


4. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol. 2023 Jul 5;19(1):59. doi: 
10.1186/s13223-023-00811-5.

Prurigo Nodularis onset during secukinumab treatment of psoriasis: a case 
report.

Yang Q(1)(2)(3), Lyu J(1)(2)(3), Gui Y(1)(2)(3), Yu S(1)(2)(3), Chen J(1)(2)(3), 
Zhang H(1)(2)(3), Liu S(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical 
University, 218 Jixi Road, Shushan District, Anhui, Hefei, 230032, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Dermatology (Anhui Medical University), Ministry of 
Education, Anhui, 230032, Hefei, China.
(3)Inflammation and Immune-Mediated Diseases Laboratory of Anhui Province, 
Hefei, 230032, China.
(4)Department of Dermatology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical 
University, 218 Jixi Road, Shushan District, Anhui, Hefei, 230032, China. 
liushengxiu@ahmu.edu.cn.
(5)Key Laboratory of Dermatology (Anhui Medical University), Ministry of 
Education, Anhui, 230032, Hefei, China. liushengxiu@ahmu.edu.cn.
(6)Inflammation and Immune-Mediated Diseases Laboratory of Anhui Province, 
Hefei, 230032, China. liushengxiu@ahmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Secukinumab has been approved by the U.S. FDA and the European 
Medicines Agency for the treatment of moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis and 
psoriatic arthritis with the documented adverse effects. Here we reported in one 
case that a new symptom, Prurigo Nodularis (PN), developed during the programmed 
dosing of secukinumab.
CASE INTRODUCTION: A 22-years-old male with a 6-month history of severe plaque 
psoriasis vulgaris was presented to the dermatology clinic two weeks after the 
fifth serial weekly doses of secukinumab, for the reason of the outbreaks of 
multiple erythematous papules and pruritus nodules on the trunk and extremities. 
Physical examination showed that psoriatic rash were under effective control 
with the previous targeted therapy of secukinumab for plaque psoriasis vulgaris, 
but new dermatologic condition was spotted with multiple edematous red firm 
papules on the trunk and extremities, in the form of soy or hemispherical 
nodules, red in color, firm to touch, with some ulcerated crusts visible at 
tops, but negative Auspitz sign. Pathological examination confirmed these 
papules as PN.
CONCLUSION: This case report is shared to inform clinicians about an unannounced 
adverse effect of the secukinumab in the treatment of psoriasis, and it is 
recommended that patients be carefully informed of the possible risk of PN 
before starting treatment.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13223-023-00811-5
PMCID: PMC10324148
PMID: 37408052

Conflict of interest statement: Qingqing Yang, Jiajie Lyu, Yu Gui, Shuling Yu, 
Jiajie Chen, Haoxue Zhang and Shengxiu Liu declare that they have no conflict of 
interest.


5. Int J Chem. 2017;9(4):31-39. doi: 10.5539/ijc.v9n4p31.

In Vitro Effects of Arthrocen, an Avocado/Soy Unsaponifiables Agent, on 
Inflammation and Global Gene Expression in Human Monocytes.

Taylor JF(1), Goudarzi R(2), Yazdi PG(1), Pedersen BA(3).

Author information:
(1)Systomic Health, USA.
(2)Division of Research and Development, Pharmin USA, LLC, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, 
University of California, San Diego, USA.

Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common form of arthritis. Symptomatically 
characterized by stiffness and pain, OA is a chronic degenerative disease of 
joints. Of note, there is growing interest in the potential use of plant-based 
compounds for symptomatic treatment of OA. Arthrocen is a plant-derived agent 
consisting of a one to two ratio of avocado and soy unsaponifiable extracts. In 
order to decipher the potential mechanisms of Arthrocen's action at the 
molecular level, we employed an in vitro assay using cultured human THP-1 cells 
(a model cell line for monocytes) to study its effects. By pairing protein 
arrays enriched for inflammatory markers, transcriptomic pathway analysis using 
RNA-Sequencing, and eicosanoid specific lipidomics, we have begun to unravel its 
potential mechanism of action. Specifically, we found that Arthrocen can 
attenuate the inflammatory response at the transcript level while inducing 
significant changes in numerous cytokines. Furthermore, we discovered that while 
Arthrocen alone did not increase IL-8 or MCP-1 levels, its presence had a 
synergistic effect on the observed increase in response to LPS stimulation. 
Additionally, this synergistic effect of Arthrocen on LPS stimulation of IL-8 
and MCP-1 protein levels was also observed at the mRNA level and suggests a 
regulatory mechanism at the transcriptional level. Interestingly, Arthrocen 
induced no changes in any of the eicosanoids studied. This multi-omics approach 
implies that Arthrocen functions at the level of gene transcription to dampen 
inflammation mediated by monocytes in OA.

DOI: 10.5539/ijc.v9n4p31
PMCID: PMC5903287
PMID: 29675116


6. Recent Pat Food Nutr Agric. 2015;7(2):92-9. doi: 
10.2174/2212798407666150629123957.

Immunomodulatory Effects of Soybeans and Processed Soy Food Compounds.

Tezuka H(1), Imai S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biodefense Research, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan. 
tezco.bre@mri.tmd.ac.jp.

Inflammation is an immune response against both internal and external antigens 
in organisms, particularly in mammals, and includes both uncontrolled chronic 
and low-grade inflammations. Uncontrolled chronic inflammation often leads to 
severe diseases such as vascular disease, arthritis, cancer, diabete, allergy, 
and autoimmunity. On the other hand, low-grade inflammation is recognized as a 
relationship between obesity and risk of metabolic syndrome. Elevated production 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines and mediators is commonly observed in patients 
with uncontrolled or low-grade inflammation-associated diseases. Plants have 
been generated phytochemicals to overcome inflammations and infections through 
evolution. Phytochemicals belong to alkaloids, polyphenols, flavonoids, 
coumarins, and terpenoids. The consumption of soybeans plays a role in immune 
modulation through their components such as isoflavones, saponins, and 
anthocyanins. Recently, it was reported that the application of phytochemicals 
into patients with inflammatory diseases improves their symptoms. Therefore, it 
is important to identify novel phytochemicals with immunomodulatory activities. 
This review introduces and discusses recent advances and patents regarding 
soybean or processed soy food compounds which exhibit immunomodulatory activity 
in immune diseases, particularly allergy, by mediating the suppression of 
inflammatory pathways.

DOI: 10.2174/2212798407666150629123957
PMID: 26118769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Rheumatol Int. 2012 Aug;32(8):2407-14. doi: 10.1007/s00296-011-1979-7. Epub
2011  Jun 17.

Protective effect of soy protein on collagen-induced arthritis in rat.

Mohammad Shahi M(1), Rashidi MR, Mahboob S, Haidari F, Rashidi B, Hanaee J.

Author information:
(1)Nutrition Research Center, Ahvaz Jondishapour University of Medical Sciences, 
Ahvaz, Iran. shahi334@gmail.com

To evaluate preventive and therapeutic effects of soy protein on 
collagen-induced arthritis rats. Sprague-Dawley rats immunized with bovine type 
II collagen emulsified in adjuvant and treated with soy protein (7 g/kg), 
dexamethasone (1 mg/kg), and casein (in control groups) by daily gavages 
feedings for 30 days. Score of arthritis recorded every day for each paws of 
animal. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin6, leptin, and adiponectin were 
measured in serums. Treatment with soy protein resulted in significant delay in 
time to onset of arthritis as well as significantly decreased arthritis 
incidence, clinical arthritis severity score, histopathological arthritis 
severity score, and in vivo cell-mediated immunity to collagen (P < 0.05). 
Administration of soy protein significantly suppressed the progression of 
collagen II-induced arthritis and inhibited the production of tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha, interleukin6, leptin, and adiponectin. Soy protein appeared to be 
a potent immunomodulatory inhibitor of collagen II-induced arthritis in rats. It 
could delay onset of RA and reduced cartilage erosion and synovitis 
inflammation. Therefore, it may be a useful protein in the prevention and 
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis patient.

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-011-1979-7
PMID: 21681567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Bioimpacts. 2011;1(3):161-70. doi: 10.5681/bi.2011.022. Epub 2011 Sep 30.

Comparison of the effects of genistein and daidzein with dexamethasone and soy 
protein on rheumatoid arthritis in rats.

Mohammad-Shahi M(1), Haidari F, Rashidi B, Saei AA, Mahboob S, Rashidi MR.

Author information:
(1)Nutrition Research Center, Ahvaz Jondishapour University of Medical Sciences, 
Ahvaz, Iran.

INTRODUCTION: We have already shown the protective effects of soy protein on 
rheumatoid arthritis in rats. In this study, the effects of genistein and 
daidzein, two isoflavones from soy on rheumatoid arthritis prognosis and 
prevention in rats have been investigated.
METHODS: Rheumatoid arthritis was induced in female Sprague-Dawley rats using 
collagen type II plus adjuvant. Rats were then treated with soy protein (7 
g/kg), dexamethasone (1 mg/kg), genistein (20 mg/kg genistein), daidzein (20 
mg/kg genistein) and casein (in control groups) by daily gavage feedings for 50 
days. Scores of arthritis were recorded every day for each paw of animal. Serum 
concentrations of TNF-α, IL-6, adiponectin and leptin were characterized. 
Tibiotarsal tissue was used for histopathologic analyses.
RESULTS: Treatment with genistein and daidzein resulted in not only a reduction 
in disease symptoms but also a delay in the onset of symptoms. Results from 
delayed-type hypersensitivity test demonstrated that the ear thickness in 
treated rats was significantly lower than that in the control group (p<0.05). 
There was a reduction in TNF-α, IL-6, adiponectin and leptin serum 
concentrations after treatment with genistein and daidzein. Dexamethasone 
reduced the serum concentrations of TNF-α, IL-6 and adiponectin but increased 
leptin serum level. Prevention of the tissue damage and joint inflammation was 
also observed following treatment with two soy isoflavones.
CONCLUSION: soy isoflavones, daidzein and especially genistein, could 
significantly improve rheumatoid arthritis symptoms in rats. The structural 
similarity of isoflavones to estrogen could be the possible underlying mechanism 
involved in the function.

DOI: 10.5681/bi.2011.022
PMCID: PMC3648967
PMID: 23678422


9. J Rheumatol. 2008 Dec;35(12):2427-9. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.080405. Epub 2008 Oct
 1.

MEFV mutations modify the clinical presentation of Henoch-Schönlein purpura.

Ozçakar ZB(1), Yalçinkaya F, Cakar N, Acar B, Kasapçopur O, Ugüten D, Soy D, 
Kara N, Uncu N, Arisoy N, Ekim M.

Author information:
(1)Ankara University School of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Nephrology, 
Istanbul, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the prevalence of MEFV gene mutations in Turkish 
patients with Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP) but with no symptoms of familial 
Mediterranean fever (FMF). In addition, we assessed the clinical and laboratory 
characteristics of HSP patients with and without MEFV mutations.
METHODS: Eighty pediatric patients with HSP (44 boys and 36 girls) were 
enrolled. Blood for mutation analysis was obtained either at the time of the 
diagnosis of HSP or during followup visits in previously diagnosed patients. No 
patient had the diagnosis of FMF in their history and in the followup period. 
Exon 10 of the MEFV gene was screened, together with p.E148Q mutation analysis.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven (34%) patients were found to be heterozygous for one of 
the screened MEFV mutations; p.M694V in 16, p.M680I in 5, p.V726A in 3, and 
p.E148Q in 3 patients. Patients with MEFV mutations were younger than those 
without mutations and they had edema and arthritis more frequently. Also, the 
frequencies of elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein 
values were found to be significantly higher in patients who had MEFV mutations.
CONCLUSION: Alterations in the MEFV gene are important susceptibility factors 
for the development of HSP and also affect the clinical presentation of it.

DOI: 10.3899/jrheum.080405
PMID: 18843775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Clin Rheumatol. 2004 Feb;23(1):92. doi: 10.1007/s10067-003-0822-2. Epub 2003
Dec  18.

A case of adult-onset Still's disease presenting with angioedema.

Soy M.

Adult-onset Still's disease (AOSD) is the adult form of Still's disease. In 
addition to classic symptoms, rarely urticaria may be seen. The author here 
presents a case of AOSD in which the patient presented with angioedema and 
urticaria.

DOI: 10.1007/s10067-003-0822-2
PMID: 14749997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]