1. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2025 Apr 15;27(4):472-479. doi: 
10.7499/j.issn.1008-8830.2411067.

[Mechanism of 2,6-DMBQ attenuates airway inflammatory responses in asthmatic 
mice via the mTOR signaling pathway].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Li J(1), Li SF(1), Xiong XM(1), Yang QY(1), Xie XL(1), Zhang YL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Third Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou 450052, China.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the therapeutic effects and mechanisms of 
2,6-dimethoxy-1,4-benzoquinone (2,6-DMBQ) in a mouse model of asthma.
METHODS: SPF-grade BALB/c mice were randomly divided into 7 groups (n=8 each 
group): normal control group, ovalbumin (OVA) group, dimethyl sulfoxide+corn oil 
group, budesonide (BUD) group, and low, medium, and high dose 2,6-DMBQ groups. 
An asthma mouse model was established by OVA induction, followed by 
corresponding drug interventions. Non-invasive lung function tests were 
performed to measure airway hyperresponsiveness, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay was used to determine levels of interleukin (IL)-17, IL-10, and serum 
immunoglobulin E in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. A cell counter was employed to 
detect eosinophil counts in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, while 
hematoxylin-eosin staining and periodic acid-Schiff staining were used to assess 
lung tissue pathological changes. Western blot was conducted to examine the 
expression of proteins related to the mammalian target of rapamycin pathway 
(p-AKT/AKT and p-p70S6K/p70S6K), and a fully automated biochemical analyzer was 
used to evaluate liver and kidney functions.
RESULTS: Compared with the normal control group, the OVA group showed increased 
enhanced pause values, inflammation scores from hematoxylin-eosin staining, 
positive area from periodic acid-Schiff staining, percentage of eosinophils, 
IL-17/IL-10 ratio, serum immunoglobulin E levels, and relative expression levels 
of p-AKT/AKT and p-p70S6K/p70S6K (P<0.05). The BUD group and the medium and high 
dose 2,6-DMBQ groups exhibited decreased values for these indicators compared to 
the OVA group (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: 2,6-DMBQ can inhibit the mTOR pathway to alleviate airway 
inflammation in asthmatic mice, possibly by mitigating the imbalance between 
Th17 and regulatory T cells.

Publisher: 目的: 探究2,6-二甲氧基-1,4-苯醌（2,6-dimethoxy-1,4-benzoquinone, 
2,6-DMBQ）在哮喘小鼠中的治疗作用及其机制。方法: 将SPF级BALB/c小鼠随机分为正常对照组、卵清蛋白（ovalbumin, 
OVA）组、融媒组、布地奈德（budesonide, 
BUD）组、2,6-DMBQ低、中、高剂量组，每组8只。采用OVA诱导法建立哮喘小鼠模型并给予相应药物干预。使用无创肺功能仪测定小鼠气道高反应性，ELISA法测定支气管肺泡灌洗液中白细胞介素（interleukin, 
IL）-17、IL-10和血清免疫球蛋白E水平，细胞计数仪检测支气管肺泡灌洗液中嗜酸性粒细胞数，苏木精-伊红染色和过碘酸-希夫染色评估肺组织病理变化，Western 
blot检测肺组织哺乳动物雷帕霉素靶蛋白通路相关蛋白（p-AKT/AKT、p-p70S6K/p70S6K）表达情况，全自动生化分析仪测定肝肾功能。结果: 
与正常对照组相比，OVA组增强呼吸间歇值、苏木精-伊红染色炎性评分和过碘酸-希夫染色阳性面积、嗜酸性粒细胞百分比、IL-17/IL-10比值、血清免疫球蛋白E水平、p-AKT/AKT和p-p70S6K/p70S6K蛋白相对表达量升高（P<0.05）；与OVA组相比，BUD组和2,6-DMBQ中、高剂量组上述指标降低（P<0.05）。结论: 
2,6-DMBQ可抑制哺乳动物雷帕霉素靶蛋白通路减轻哮喘小鼠气道炎症，可能通过减轻辅助性T细胞17/调节性T细胞失衡发挥作用。.

DOI: 10.7499/j.issn.1008-8830.2411067
PMCID: PMC12010994
PMID: 40241367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: 所有作者声明不存在利益冲突。


2. Environ Res. 2025 Apr 10;277:121583. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2025.121583. Online
 ahead of print.

Associations between agricultural use of pyrethroid insecticides and asthma: 
AGRICAN cohort results.

Baldi I(1), de Graaf L(2), Bureau M(2), Tual S(3), Douwes J(4), Lebailly P(5).

Author information:
(1)Univ. Bordeaux, Inserm, Bordeaux Population Health Research Centre, EPICENE 
Team, UMR 1219, F-33000, Bordeaux, France; Service Santé Travail Environnement, 
Pôle de Santé Publique, CHU de Bordeaux, 33000, Bordeaux, France. Electronic 
address: Isabelle.Baldi@u-bordeaux.fr.
(2)Univ. Bordeaux, Inserm, Bordeaux Population Health Research Centre, EPICENE 
Team, UMR 1219, F-33000, Bordeaux, France.
(3)INSERM, UMR1086 ANTICIPE, Cancers et Préventions, Centre François Baclesse, 
Caen, France.
(4)Research Centre for Hauora and Health, Massey University, Wellington, New 
Zealand.
(5)INSERM, UMR1086 ANTICIPE, Cancers et Préventions, Centre François Baclesse, 
Caen, France; Université Caen Normandie, Caen, France.

RATIONALE: Following the withdrawal of organochlorines and organophosphates, 
pyrethroids have become the most used insecticides in both agricultural and 
domestic settings.
OBJECTIVES: We analyzed data from the French AGRICAN agricultural cohort to 
assess associations of occupational pyrethroid exposures and 
allergic/non-allergic asthma.
METHODS: At enrollment, asthma diagnosed by a doctor was reported by 11 815 
participants (7028 classified as non-allergic and 4458 as allergic based on the 
presence of eczema and/or hay fever). Individual exposures to 17 pyrethroids 
were defined in 124 992 participants, based on a combination of the history of 
pesticide treatment of 11 crops (grassland, vineyard, wheat/barley, corn, field 
peas, potatoes, tobacco, beets, sunflower, rape, fruits) and a crop-exposure 
matrix.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: In men, no association was observed for any of 
the pyrethroids regardless of asthma phenotype. In contrast, in ever-exposed 
women, asthma risk was increased with use of any pyrethroid, both for allergic 
(+80 %) and non-allergic asthma (+40 %). Highest increases were observed for 
allergic asthma with fenpropathrin (OR = 2.00; 95 %CI:1.38-2.90), tralomethrin 
(OR = 1.81; 95 %CI:1.28-2.56), fenvalerate (OR = 1.81; 95 %CI:1.38-2.38), 
permethrin (OR = 1.78; 95 %CI:1.26-2.50) and deltamethrin (OR = 1.76; 
95 %CI:1.35-2.29). Stratified analyses on women who reported living on a farm in 
early life showed stronger associations for non-allergic asthma. For women who 
reported early life living on vineyards associations with pyrethroids were 
stronger for both allergic and non-allergic asthma. Associations for women who 
lived on cattle farms were reduced for some pyrethroids.
CONCLUSION: Occupational pyrethroid exposure was positively associated with both 
allergic and non-allergic asthma in women but not in men.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2025.121583
PMID: 40220893

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


3. Public Health Nutr. 2025 Mar 26;28(1):e92. doi: 10.1017/S1368980025000370.

Disproportionately higher asthma risk and incidence with high fructose corn 
syrup, but not sucrose intake, among Black young adults: the CARDIA Study.

DeChristopher LR(1), Tucker KL(2).

Author information:
(1)Independent Researcher, Hopewell Life Sciences, M.Sc. Biochemistry, Molecular 
Biology.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Nutritional Sciences, University of 
Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: There have been unsafe levels of unpaired fructose in the high 
fructose corn syrup (HFCS) in US beverages, and research/case study evidence 
shows that their intake is associated with greater asthma 
prevalence/risk/incidence, a debilitating disease, likely due to fructose 
malabsorption, gut fructosylation and gut dysbiosis mechanisms. The 
'unexplained' asthma epidemic has disproportionately affected children and Black 
individuals, groups with higher fructose malabsorption prevalence than others, 
and research to assess disproportionately higher asthma risk/incidence among 
Black individuals in association with HFCS-sweetened beverage intake is lacking.
DESIGN: Demographic, lifestyle and dietary data collected at enrollment 
(1985-86), and incident asthma through exam 5 (1995-96), were used in Cox 
proportional hazards models to assess HFCS intake associations (hazard ratios) 
with asthma risk/incidence.
SETTING: CARDIA study participants from Birmingham, AL, Chicago, IL, 
Minneapolis, MN and Oakland, CA.
PARTICIPANTS: 1998 Black and 2104 White young adults.
RESULTS: HFCS-sweetened beverage intake > once/week was significantly associated 
with higher asthma risk relative to ≤ once/week (P-trend = 0·04), among Black 
participants only; risk was 2·8 times higher among 2-4 times/week consumers (HR 
= 2·8, 95 % CI 1·1, 7·3, P = 0·04) and 3·5 times higher when consumed multiple 
times/d, independent of sucrose intake/obesity/dietary quality/smoking/in-home 
smoke-exposure (HR = 3·5, 95 % CI 1·3, 9·9, P = 0·02). Intake of orange juice, 
with nominal unpaired fructose, was not associated with asthma in either group, 
nor was intake of sucrose, a disaccharide (paired) of fructose/glucose.
CONCLUSIONS: Ubiquitous HFCS in the US food supply, with HFCS that contains 
high/unsafe unpaired fructose, also known as excess-free-fructose, and the 
fructose/gut/lung/axis are overlooked risk factors in the 'unexplained' US 
asthma epidemic that disproportionately affects Black individuals.

DOI: 10.1017/S1368980025000370
PMID: 40135583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Environ Monit Assess. 2025 Feb 13;197(3):287. doi: 10.1007/s10661-025-13718-y.

Prevalence of aeroallergen sensitization in a polluted and industrialized area: 
a pilot study in South Africa's Vaal Triangle.

Gharbi D(1)(2)(3), Neumann FH(4), Staats J(5), McDonald M(6), Linde JH(7), 
Mmatladi T(4), Podile K(4), Piketh S(4), Burger R(4), Garland RM(7), Bester 
P(8), Lebre PH(9), Ricci C(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Plant Sciences, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. 
dorra.gharbi@unibe.ch.
(2)Oeschger Centre for Climate Change Research, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland. dorra.gharbi@unibe.ch.
(3)Unit for Environmental Sciences and Management, Faculty of Natural and 
Agricultural Science, North-West University, Potchefstroom, South Africa. 
dorra.gharbi@unibe.ch.
(4)Unit for Environmental Sciences and Management, Faculty of Natural and 
Agricultural Science, North-West University, Potchefstroom, South Africa.
(5)Faculty of Health Sciences, North-West University, Potchefstroom, South 
Africa.
(6)The Allergy Clinic, Blairgowrie, Gauteng, South Africa.
(7)Department of Geography, Geoinformatics and Meteorology, University of 
Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
(8)Africa Unit for Transdisciplinary Health Research, North-West University, 
Potchefstroom, South Africa.
(9)Centre for Microbial Ecology and Genomics, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, 
South Africa.

This pioneering study evaluates the prevalence of aeroallergens reactivity among 
atopic populations living in the Vaal Triangle Airshed Priority Area (VTAPA), 
South Africa. A total of 138 volunteers (51 males and 87 females), of African, 
colored, white, and Asian ethnicity, and with a mean (range) age of 22 (18-56) 
years were participating in the study. The study was conducted on the North-West 
University (NWU) campus in Vanderbijlpark/VTAPA. The International Study of 
Asthma and Allergies in Childhood questionnaire was utilized for pre-screening 
to identify individuals with probable allergic dispositions. Subsequently, skin 
prick testing was conducted using commercial aeroallergen extracts for all 
confirmed participants with allergy symptoms. One hundred six participants were 
clinically diagnosed with pollen and fungal spore allergies. The highest allergy 
prevalence was attributed to Cynodon dactylon ((L.) Pers) (Bermuda grass) 
(41.5%), followed by Lolium perenne (L.) (ryegrass), grass mix, and Zea mays 
(L.) (maize) (31.1%), respectively. Moreover, among the tree allergens, Olea 
(L.) (olive tree) was the most prevalent allergen (20; 18.8%), followed by 
Platanus (L.) (plane tree) (18; 16.9%). Among the weeds, 16 (15.1%) participants 
were allergic to the weed mix (Artemisia (L.) (wormwood), Chenopodium (Link) 
(goosefoot), Salsola (L.) (saltwort), Plantago (L.) (plantain), and 11 (10.3%) 
to Ambrosia (L.) (ragweed)). Regarding the fungal spores, Alternaria (Fr.) (9; 
8.5%) followed by Cladosporium (Link) (5; 4.7%) had the highest skin 
sensitivity. In this pilot study, our findings provide insights into the 
prevalence of allergic responses in the study population-underlining the strong 
impact of allergens of exotic plants-and contribute to the existing 
aerobiological data in South Africa.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10661-025-13718-y
PMCID: PMC11825541
PMID: 39945937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: All authors have read, understood, and have complied as applicable 
with the statement on Ethical responsibilities of Authors as found in the 
Instructions for Authors. Competing interests: The authors declare no competing 
interests.


5. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2024 Jul 1;327(1):L86-L101. doi: 
10.1152/ajplung.00066.2024. Epub 2024 May 7.

NF-κB/RelA signaling in secretoglobin progenitors mediates plasticity and 
MMP-induced barrier disruption in house dust mite-induced allergic asthma.

Skibba ME(1), Brasier AR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin, United States.
(2)Institute for Clinical and Translational Research, Madison, Wisconsin, United 
States.

The mechanisms how aeroallergens induce sensitization are incompletely 
understood. The house dust mite (HDM) Dermatophagoides pteronyssius (Der p) is a 
ubiquitous aeroallergen that represents a major cause of allergic rhinitis and 
asthma. Herein, we tested whether HDM-induced aeroallergen exposure sensitivity 
is caused by the innate-immune response in small airway epithelial cells. HDM 
exposure is a rapid activator of NF-κB/RelA in the Secretoglobin (Scgb1a1+) 
lineage associated with upregulation of NF-κB/RelA-dependent markers of 
epithelial plasticity. To determine the effect of epithelial NF-κB signaling, 
NF-κB was depleted in a tamoxifen (TMX)-inducible Scgb1a1-CreERTM mouse within a 
CL57B/L6 background. Corn oil or TMX-treated/RelA-depleted [RelA knockdown (KD)] 
mice were repetitively exposed to airway HDM challenges to induce airway 
hyperresponsiveness (AHR). Strikingly, we observed that HDM induces hallmarks of 
epithelial plasticity through upregulation of the mesenchymal core factors SNAI1 
and ZEB1 and production of metalloproteinase (MMP)9 that are RelA-dependent. 
Downstream, HDM-induced mucous metaplasia, Th2 polarization, allergen 
sensitivity, and airway hyperreactivity were all reduced in the RelA-depleted 
mice. Mechanistically, HDM-induced functional and structural barrier disruption 
was dependent on RelA signaling and associated with active MMP secretion into 
the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. To establish the role of MMP2/9 in barrier 
disruption, we observe that a small-molecule MMP inhibitor (SB-3CT) blocked 
HDM-induced barrier disruption and activation of plasticity in naïve wild-type 
(WT) mice. Loss of functional barrier was associated with MMP disruption of zona 
occludens (ZO)-1 containing adherens junctions. Overall, this data indicates 
that host innate signaling in the Scgb1a1+ progenitors is directly linked to 
epithelial plasticity, MMP9 secretion, and enhanced barrier permeability that 
allows allergen penetration, sensitization producing allergic asthma (AA) in 
vivo. We propose that maintenance of epithelial integrity may reduce allergic 
sensitization and AA.NEW & NOTEWORTHY Allergic asthma from house dust mite (HDM) 
allergy causes substantial morbidity. This study examines the dynamic changes in 
small airway epithelial cells in a mouse model of HDM exposure. Our findings 
indicate that NF-κB/RelA signaling mediates matrix metalloproteinase production, 
disrupting the epithelial barrier resulting in allergic sensitization. Our 
findings bring new insight into mechanisms for epithelial cell-state change in 
the allergen response, creating a potential therapeutic pathway for maintaining 
barrier function in asthma.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00066.2024
PMCID: PMC11380976
PMID: 38713619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest, financial or 
otherwise, are declared by the authors.


6. Nutr J. 2024 Feb 2;23(1):16. doi: 10.1186/s12937-024-00919-3.

40 years of adding more fructose to high fructose corn syrup than is safe, 
through the lens of malabsorption and altered gut health-gateways to chronic 
disease.

DeChristopher LR(1).

Author information:
(1), East Fishkill, USA. luanne.dechristopher@gmail.com.

Labels do not disclose the excess-free-fructose/unpaired-fructose content in 
foods/beverages. Objective was to estimate excess-free-fructose intake using 
USDA loss-adjusted-food-availability (LAFA) data (1970-2019) for high fructose 
corn syrup (HFCS) and apple juice, major sources of excess-free-fructose, for 
comparison with malabsorption dosages (~ 5 g-children/ ~ 10 g-adults). Unlike 
sucrose and equimolar fructose/glucose, unpaired-fructose triggers fructose 
malabsorption and its health consequences. Daily intakes were calculated for 
HFCS that is generally-recognized-as-safe/ (55% fructose/45% glucose), and 
variants (65/35, 60/40) with higher fructose-to-glucose ratios (1.9:1, 1.5:1), 
as measured by independent laboratories. Estimations include consumer-level-loss 
(CLL) allowances used before (20%), and after, subjective, retroactively-applied 
increases (34%), as recommended by corn-refiners (~ 2012). No contributions from 
crystalline-fructose or agave syrup were included due to lack of LAFA data. 
High-excess-free-fructose-fruits (apples/pears/watermelons/mangoes) were not 
included. Eaten in moderation they are less likely to trigger malabsorption. 
Another objective was to identify potential parallel trends between 
excess-free-fructose intake and the "unexplained" US asthma epidemic. The 
fructose/gut-dysbiosis/lung axis is well documented, case-study evidence and 
epidemiological research link HFCS/apple juice intake with asthma, and unlike 
gut-dysbiosis/gut-fructosylation, childhood asthma prevalence data 
spans > 40 years. Results Excess-free-fructose daily intake for individuals 
consuming HFCS with an average 1.5:1 fructose-to-glucose ratio, ranged from 
0.10 g/d in 1970, to 11.3 g/d in 1999, to 6.5 g/d in 2019, and for those 
consuming HFCS with an average 1.9:1 ratio, intakes ranged from 0.13 g/d to 
16.9 g/d (1999), to 9.7 g/d in 2019, based upon estimates with a 20% CLL 
allowance. Intake exceeded dosages that trigger malabsorption (~ 5 g) 
around ~ 1980. By the early 1980's, tripled apple juice intake had added ~ 0.5 g 
to average-per-capita excess-free-fructose intake. Contributions were higher 
(~ 3.8 g /4-oz.) for individuals consuming apple juice consistent with a healthy 
eating pattern (4-oz. children, 8-oz. adults). The "unexplained" childhood 
asthma epidemic (1980-present) parallels increasing average-per-capita 
HFCS/apple juice intake trends and reflects epidemiological research findings. 
Conclusion Displacement of sucrose with HFCS, its ubiquitous presence in the US 
food-supply, the industry practice of adding more fructose to HFCS than 
generally-recognized-as-safe, and increased use of apple juice/crystalline 
fructose/agave syrup in foods/beverages has contributed to unprecedented 
excess-free-fructose intake levels, fructose malabsorption, gut-dysbiosis 
and gut-fructosylation (immunogen burden)-gateways to chronic disease.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12937-024-00919-3
PMCID: PMC10835987
PMID: 38302919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


7. Allergol Select. 2023 Mar 31;7:57-83. doi: 10.5414/ALX02400E. eCollection
2023.

Vegan diets from an allergy point of view - Position paper of the DGAKI working 
group on food allergy.

Reese I(1), Schäfer C(2), Ballmer-Weber B(3)(4), Beyer K(5), Dölle-Bierke S(6), 
van Dullemen S(7), Jappe U(8)(9), Müller S(10), Schnadt S(11), Treudler R(12), 
Worm M(6).

Author information:
(1)Nutrition Therapy, Munich.
(2)NutritionTherapy, Schwarzenbek, Germany.
(3)Clinic for Dermatology and Allergology, Cantonal Hospital St. Gallen, St. 
Gallen.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zürich, Switzerland.
(5)Clinic for Pediatrics with focus on Pneumology and Immunology, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin - Campus Virchow-Klinikum.
(6)Allergology and Immunology, Department of Dermatology, Venereology and 
Allergology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin.
(7)University Clinic Frankfurt, Clinic for Pediatrics, Frankfurt.
(8)Division of Clinical and Molecular Allergology, Research Center Borstel, 
German Center for Lung Research (DZL) Airway Research Center North (ARCN), 
Borstel.
(9)Interdisciplinary Allergy Outpatient Clinic, Department of Pneumology, 
University of Lübeck, Lübeck.
(10)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, University Clinic Freiburg, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg.
(11)German Allergy and Asthma Association (DAAB), Mönchengladbach, and.
(12)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Leipzig University 
Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany.

Erratum in
    Allergol Select. 2024 Jun 13;8:228. doi: 10.5414/ALX02400ECorr.

Vegan diets are currently attracting a great deal of attention. However, 
avoiding animal-based foods restricts the diet and is associated with risks, the 
extent and medical implications of which are at present not sufficiently 
understood. Elimination diets represent the usual therapeutic long-term 
management in the presence of food allergy. In order to understand the risks of 
vegan diets and to discuss these critically from the perspective of food 
allergies, the expertise of a nutritionist/dietitian with expertise in this area 
is indispensable. This position paper deals with the incentives behind and the 
benefits of a plant-based diet. The knowledge required to cover macro- and 
micronutrient dietary requirements is presented. Using the avoidance of cow's 
milk as an example, the challenges of adequately meeting nutritional needs are 
identified and (so-called) milk alternatives are evaluated from an allergy and 
nutritional point of view. Finally, other plant-based (substitute) products are 
evaluated from the same perspective, as significant protein sources in vegan 
diets (e.g., legumes, nuts, and seeds) are at the same time potential and potent 
triggers of allergic reactions. However, the allergic potential of many 
substitute products cannot be fully assessed at present due to gaps in research. 
Wheat as the most important trigger for anaphylaxis in adults is also evaluated. 
Finally, the increase in ultra-processed products in the (vegan) food sector and 
their potential consequences for the immune system are discussed.

© Dustri-Verlag Dr. K. Feistle.

DOI: 10.5414/ALX02400E
PMCID: PMC10088878
PMID: 37056444

Conflict of interest statement: R. Treudler, S. Schnadt, S. van Dullemen, B. 
Ballmer-Weber, S. Müller, U. Jappe declare no conflict of interest. I. Reese 
declares the following conflicts of interest outside the submitted work: 
Honoraria: AGPAS e. V., Aimmune Therapeutics Germany GmbH, AlbertZwei media 
GmbH, ALK-Abello Arzneimittel GmbH, Beiersdorf Dermo Medical GmbH, BVDD e. V., 
DAAB e.V., DAEM e.V., Danone Deutschland GmbH, DAPM e. V., DDG e.V., DGAKI, DWA, 
GPA e.V., GEKA mbH, GWT-TUD GmbH, Helmholtz-Zentrum München, InfectoPharm 
Arzneimittel und Consilium GmbH, Kneipp-Ärztebund e.V., Leo Pharma Gmbh, Medical 
Project Design, MVS Medizinverlage, Nestlé Deutschland AG, Netz für entzündliche 
Dermatosen in Hannover e.V., Novartis Pharma GmbH, RG Ärztefortbildung, Sanomega 
GmbH, Schweizer Milchproduzenten SMP, SWR, Uniklinikum Augsburg, Uniklinikum TU 
München, Uniklinikum Marburg, VDD e.V., VDOe e.V., Vfed e.V. Publishers: Dustri, 
de Gruyter, Springer, Thieme, Münchner Verlagsgruppe. Reimbursement of travel 
costs: DGAKI, EAACI, GA2LEN GAFA. Advisory board activity: DAAB, DGAKI. C. 
Schäfer declares the following conflicts of interest outside the submitted work: 
Travel costs, honoraria: abbvie Deutschland GmbH & Co. KG, Aimmune Therapeutics 
Germany GmbH, DAAB e. V., DAEM e. V., DGAKI e. V., DGEM e. V., Dustri Verlag, GU 
Verlag, MVS Medizinverlage, Nestle Deutschland AG, Novartis Pharma GmbH, Roxall 
Medizin GmbH, Sanofi-Aventis Deutschland GmbH, Springer Verlag, Thieme Verlag, 
VFED e. V. Advisory board activity: DAAB e. V., NNI, Quetheb e.V. K. Beyer 
declares the receipt of consultation fees and/ or honoraria by Danone/Nutricia, 
Hipp und Nestlé, as well as research grants by Danone/Nutricia and Hipp outside 
the submitted work. M. Worm declares the receipt of honoraria and/or 
consultation fees by the following companies: Novartis Pharma GmbH, 
Sanofi-Aventis Deutschland GmbH, DBV Technologies S.A, Aimmune Therapeutics UK 
Limited, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Leo Pharma GmbH, Boehringer Ingelheim 
Pharma GmbH &Co.KG, ALK-Abelló Arzneimittel GmbH, Lilly Deutschland GmbH, Kymab 
Limited, Amgen GmbH, Abbvie Deutschland GmbH & Co. KG, Pfizer Pharma GmbH, Mylan 
Germany GmbH (A Viatris Company), AstraZeneca GmbH, Lilly Deutschland GmbH and 
GlaxoSmithKline GmbH & Co. KG. S. Dölle-Bierke declares the receipt of honoraria 
by ALK and DAAB e. V., as well as research grants by BMBF (01EA2107B) outside 
the submitted work Table 1.Daily vegan eating plan covering requirements for an 
adult with a body weight of 60 kg (German Federal Food Code) [12]. 
MealIngredientsQuantity (g)Energy (kcal)Protein (g)Lysine 
(mg)Cysteine/Methionine (mg)1st breakfastBanana porridgeOats whole-grain 
flakes702489.3320402Soy drink + calcium200546.9440100Banana1251131.471142nd 
breakfastWhole-grain bread with peanut/chocolate spread and raw 
vegetablesWhole-grain rye bread701395.1224168Peanut butter251456.6258165Cocoa 
low in oil (“baking cocoa”)4140.92922Carrots, raw150501.37132LunchIndian potato 
and lentil stewPotatoes, peeled cooked2001403.8248106Lentils, ripe dried 
cooked15018315.81127281Tomatoes150261.45416Onion, cooked3090.42116Rapeseed 
oil10106Iodized fluoridated table salt2SnackStrawberry soy yogurt with 
walnutsSoy yogurt with calcium200546.9442100Strawberries 
(raw)125401.04310Walnuts302144.8133155DinnerPan-fried vegetables with 
tofuTofu8010613.1817343Chickpeas1201699.0637216Mixed vegetables, 
cooked250986.8505218Rapeseed oil12106Sesame, roasted10601.95983Iodized 
fluoridated table salt2Total2,07496.45,4992,447Note: Daily requirement of lysine 
is 4.61 g, of cysteine and methionine 2.21 g. Macronutrient profile: 18.1 energy 
(E)% protein, 32.48 E% fat, 42.98 E% carbohydrates [13]. Table 2.DIAAS of 
selected food proteins (partly isolated) according to [20]. FoodDIAAS 0.5 – 3 
yearsDIAAS > 3 yearsProtein content %Potato protein96 – 113120 – 13478 – 81% 
(protein content potato: 2%)Wheat34 – 6443 – 7611 – 16Oatmeal48 – 6257 – 7310 – 
15Fava beans49 – 5957 – 6925 – 27Pea54 – 7769 – 9118 – 28Lupine63 – 6974 – 8131 
– 36Soybean, dried82 – 978 – 12535 – 37Soy protein isolate75 – 8488 – 9885 – 
93Soy protein concentrate86 – 97101 – 11264 – 65Ham, smoked115 – 125123 – 14224 
– 34Whey powder81 – 87101 – 10912 – 13 (whey content in milk: 0.6 – 1%)Casein113 
– 120132 – 14187 – 89 (casein content in milk: 2.6%)DIAAS = digestible 
indispensable amino acid score. Table 3.Combination ratios for a meal with ~ 20 
g of protein providing a complete protein in terms of the digestible 
indispensable amino acid score (DIAAS); according to [12, 21]. Protein sources 
in g foodPercentage of proteinsTotal protein content (g)Protein 173 g pea 
(cooked)2520.0Protein 244 g wheat (whole grain/cooked)25Protein 3530 g 
potato50Protein 115 g oats (whole grain)1020.0Protein 243 g lentils 
(cooked)20Protein 3740 g potato70Protein 133 g soybeans (cooked)2520.0Protein 
297 g wheat (whole grain/cooked)20Protein 3580 g potato55Protein 1160 g corn 
(whole grain/cooked)2520.0Protein 2790 g potato75Protein 1146 g wheat (whole 
grain/cooked)3020.0Protein 2740 g potato70Protein 164 g lentil 
(cooked)3020.0Protein 2740 g potato70 Table 4.A Comparison of the nutrients of 
cow’s milk with selected plant-based drinks (German Federal Food Code 3.01; 
Alnatura 2022; Alpro 2022; Bedda 2022; Harvest Moon 2022; Luve 2022; Oatly 2022; 
Provamel 2022; Rewe 2022). ProductsEnergy (kcal/ 100 mL)Fat (%)Carbohydrates 
(%)Protein (%)Calcium (mg)Milk alternativesCow’s milk (whole 
milk)653.54.73.4120Soy drink (e.g., Alpro Sojadrink Bio (i.e. organic soy 
drink))381.82.33.012.31Soy drink (e.g., Alpro Sojadrink Original mit Calcium 
(i.e. plain soy drink with calcium))391.82.53.0120Lupine drink (e.g., Luve aus 
Lupinen Natur (i.e. plain lupine drink))501.57.21.0120Almond drink (e.g., 
Provamel organic-bio Mandel (i.e. plain organic almond drink))382.52.41.0–Cashew 
drink (e.g., Provamel bio-organic Cashew No sugars (i.e. unsweetened organic 
cashew drink))382.81.31.2–Coconut drink (e.g., organic-bio Barista Kokos (i.e. 
organic coconut drink with foaming properties))361.54.70.4–Coconut drink (e.g., 
Alnatura Kokosdrink ungesüßt (i.e. unsweetened plain coconut 
drink))120.51.31.7–Oat drink (e.g., Oatly Haferdrink Calcium (i.e. calcium 
fortified oat drink))461.56.71.0120Oat drink (e.g., Oatly Haferdrink Barista 
Edition (i.e. oat drink with foaming properties))593.06.61.0120Spelt drink 
(e.g., Alnatura Dinkeldrink ungesüßt (i.e. unsweetened spelt 
drink))421.56.20.8–Rice drink (e.g. Provamel organic-bio 
Rice)541.111.00.1–Yogurt alternativesCow’s milk yogurt 3.5% 
fat693.84.43.9120Alpro Natur Ohne Zucker (i.e. plain unsweetened soy yogurt 
alternative) 422.3–4.0120Alpro Heidelbeere (i.e. soy yogurt alternative with 
blueberry flavour)700.48.23.7120Alpro Natur Mit Mandeln (i.e. plain soy yogurt 
alternative with almonds)542.82.33.9120Harvest Moon Coconut Natur - Bio (i.e. 
organic plain coconut yogurt alternative)12811.94.50.8–Luve Lughurt Natur 
(Lupinenjoghurt – i.e. plain lupine yogurt alternative)1015.510.01.7–Luve 
Lughurt Mango (i.e. lupine yogurt alternative with mango 
flavour)1065.014.01.5–Rewe Bio & vegan Kokos Natur (i.e. plain organic coconut 
yogurt alternative)977.75.11.4–Luve Lughurt Natur zuckerfrei (i.e. plain 
unsweetened lupine yogurt)966.08.51.8–Vegan spreadable cream (e.g., Bedda 
Frischcrème natur)30030.51.04.0–Alnatura (Alnatura Produktions- und Handels GmbH 
website): https://www.alnatura.de/de-de/produkte/suche/ (05.08.2022); Alpro 
(Alpro GmbH), website: 
https://www.alpro.com/de/produkte/drinks/sojadrinks-natur/sojadrink-original-mit-calcium/ 
(05.08.2022); Bedda (Ethiconomy Services GmbH), website: 
https://bedda-world.com/produkte/ (05.08.2022); Harvest Moon (Whollees GmbH), 
website: https://harvestmoon.de/products#milk_alternatives (05.08.2022); Luve 
(Prolupin GmbH), website: https://madewithluve.de/produkte/ (05.08.2022); Oatly 
(Oatly AB, Malmö, Schweden), website: https://www.oatly.com/de-de/stuff-we-make 
(05.08.2022); Provamel (Alpro GmbH), website: 
https://www.provamel.com/de/produkte (05.08.2022); Rewe (Rewe Markt GmbH), 
website: https://www.rewe.de/marken/eigenmarken/bio/rewe-bio-produkte/ 
(05.08.2022). Table 5.Comparison of cheese, cream cheese, and yogurt with 
alternatives (focus on protein) (Alpro 2022; Bedda 2022; Simply V 2022) [12]. 
ProductCheese from cow’s milk (reference) versus vegan alternativeProtein 
contentCalciumAllergensTrace identificationSemi-hard cheeseSemi-hard cheese 45% 
FDM25.3%690 mgCow’s milkSimply V® Vegane Genießerscheiben Fein Cremig (i.e. 
slices cheese alternative)0.5%–Almonds+Bedda® Scheiben Classic (i.e. slices 
cheese alternative)0.0%+––Cream cheeseCream cheese heavy cream (60% FDM)11.3%79 
mgCow’s milkSimply V® Streichgenuss Cremig-Mild (i.e. cream cheese 
alternative)4.5%–Almonds+Bedda® Frischcreme Kräuter (i.e. cream cheese 
alternative with herbs)4.0%–Almonds–FDM = fat in dry matter. edda® (Ethiconomy 
Services GmbH), website: https://bedda-world.com/produkte/ (05.08.2022); Simply 
V® (E.V.A. GmbH) website: https://www.simply-v.de/de/produkte/ (05.08.2022). 
Figure 110 most frequent triggers of food-induced anaphylaxis. Anaphylaxis 
Registry, German-speaking countries (Germany, Austria, Switzerland), as of 
October 29, 2020. Total n = 1,790 confirmed food-induced anaphylaxis cases (n = 
1,141, children and adolescents 0 – 17 years; n = 649, adults 18 years and 
older). Only cases that met the NIAID/FAAN (National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases/Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis Network) definition [40] of an 
anaphylactic reaction and where the trigger was diagnosed as confirmed [39] were 
included.Figure 2The most frequent triggers or groups of triggers in confirmed 
anaphylaxis to foods of plant origin. Based on [41]. Table 6.Nutritional values 
and selected allergenic structures of selected legumes for estimation of 
possible risks for cross-reactive allergic reactions (based on 100 g 
ready-to-eat final product) according to Allergome (www.allergome.org); 
allergens that are additionally documented in the WHO/IUIS database 
(www.allergen.org) are presented in bold. FoodEnergy (kilocalories) [fat in g, 
carbohydrates in g, protein in g]Important allergenic structuresNotes (focus 
allergy/food form)Fenugreek Trigonella foenum-graecum366 [6.4/48.3/23.0]7S 
vicilin: Tri fg 1: 2S albumin: Tri fg 2 7S globulin: Tri fg 3 Bet v 1-like: Tri 
fg 4No WHO/IUIS documentation yet Note: is increasingly used in usual spice 
quantitiesPeanut Arachis hypogaea599 [48.4/7.48/29.78]7S vicilin: Ara h 1 + 
isoforms 2S albumin: Ara h 2/Ara h 6/Ara h 7 + isoforms 11S globulin: Ara h 3 
Profilin: Ara h 5 Bet v 1-like: Ara h 8 + isoforms LTP: Ara h 9/Ara h 16/Ara h 
17 + isoforms Oleosins: Ara h10/Ara h 11, Ara h 14/Ara h 15 + isoformsPeanut 
products are available in many variants (roasted, defatted, as flour, or as 
oil), resulting in significantly differing macronutrient contents.Peanut 
roasted630 [52.95/9.28/26.94]Peanut flour defatted flour349 
[0.55/30.65/52.50]Peas, ripe-flour Pisum sativum316 [1.51/44.0/24.1]7S vicilin: 
Pis s 1 + isoforms 7S vicilin/Convicilin + isoform: Pis s 2 LTP + isoform: Pis s 
3 Profilin: Pis s 5 Bet v 1-like: Pis s 6Pis 1 and Pis 2 – together with 
isoforms probably the main allergensChickpea, dried Cicer arietinum337 
[5.9/44.0/19.0]7S vicilin: Cic a 1 2S albumin: Cic a 2S ilbumin LTP: Cic a 3 11S 
globulin: Cic a 6Chickpea flour contains 20% protein, twice as much as wheat 
flourLentil, dried ripe Lens culinaris307 [(1.6/40.5/23.4]7S vicilin: Len c 1 + 
three isoforms LTP: Len c 3 + isoform No 2S albumin or Bet v 1 homolog described 
so farLupine, grist Lupinus species356 [8.7/13.0/43.0]7S vicilin: Lup a 1/Lupan 
1 major allergen, cross-reaction between peanut and lupine. LTP: Lup an 3 + 
isoform Bet v 1-like: Lup a 4 Profilin: Lup a 5 + isoform 2S albumin: Lup an 
delta conglutinBased on the sequence homologies of lupine products, a similar 
allergenic potency for birch pollen allergen can be assumed for patients as with 
soybeanSoybean, dried Glycine maxima386 [18.3/6.3/38.2]Hydrophobic protein: Gly 
m 1 Defensin: Gly m 2 Profilin: Gly m 3 + isoforms Bet v 1-like: Gly m 4 + 
isoform 7S vicilin: Gly m 5 + isoforms 11S globulin: Gly m 6 + isoforms Seed 
biotinylated protein: Gly m 7 2S albumin: Gly m 8Soy products are available in 
many variants (roasted, defatted, as flour, or as oil), resulting in 
significantly differing macronutrient contents.Soybean, roasted431 
[24.0/6.1/50.0]Soy protein (TVP)291 [1.5/7.0/50.0]Nutritional information is 
based on the German Federal Food Code 3.02 [12] and is part of the 
Prodi/Optidiet nutrition software. TVP = textured vegetable protein. Table 
7.Nutritional values and selected allergenic structures of relevant nuts for the 
estimation of possible risks for cross-reactive allergic reactions (related to 
100 g of the ready-to-eat final product) according to Allergome 
(www.allergome.org); allergens that are additionally documented in the WHO/IUS 
database (www.allergen.org) are presented in bold. FoodEnergy (kilocalories) 
[fat in g, carbohydrates in g, protein in g]Important allergenic structuresNotes 
(focus allergy/food form)Cashews Anacardium occidentale590 [42.2/30.5/20.6]7S 
globulin: Ana o 1, 11S gGlobulin: Ana o 2 2S albumin: Ana o 3 (f443, major 
allergen), Bet v 1-like isoformCashew flour, de-oiled Anacardium occidentale356 
[2.0/41.8/39.6]Basic ingredient for cashew processing (for example, cheese 
alternatives, drinks, and snacks).Hazelnut, natural Corylus avellana664 
[63.3/6.0/16.3]PR-10: Cor a 1 and additional 10 isoforms Profilin: Cor a 2 + 2 
isoforms LTP: Cor a 8 + isoform 11S globulin: Cor a 9 + isoform 7S vicilin: Cor 
a 11 + isoform 2S albumin: Cor a 14 + isoform 7S globulin: Cor a 1637 known 
allergen structures, of which 12 are documented at WHO/IUIS, but 2 are inhalant 
allergens. Various isoforms are known.Hazelnut, roasted Corylus avellana685 
([6.7/5.4/14.8]Nutritional information is based on the German Federal Food Code 
3.02 [12] and is part of the Prodi/Optidiet nutrition software. Table 
8.Nutritional values and selected allergenic structures of relevant oilseeds and 
seeds for the estimation of possible risks for cross-reactive allergic reactions 
(related to 100 g of the ready-to-eat final product) according to Allergome 
(www.allergome.org); allergens that are additionally documented in the WHO/IUS 
database (www.allergen.org) are presented in bold. FoodEnergy (kilocalories) 
[fat in g, carbohydrates in g, protein in g]Important allergenic structuresNotes 
(focus allergy/food form)Psyllium Plantago ovata271 [7.0/3.5/16.0]Pla o without 
further characterizationNote the significantly different nutrient profile 
compared to psyllium husks.Psyllium husks Plantago ovata222 [0.7/12.0/2.3]Hemp 
seeds, shelled Cannabis sativa611 [48.0/16.0/25.0]Profilin: Can s 2 (identified 
as an aeroallergen) LTP: Can s 3 + isoform (identified as an aeroallergen, not a 
food allergen). Can s 4: Oxygen Evolving Enhancer Protein 2 (identified as an 
aeroallergen). Can s 5: Bet v 1-like (identified as an aeroallergen)Hemp seeds 
should preferably be used shelled. Unprocessed and unshelled hemp seeds must be 
pre-processed by heat to avoid the antinutritive substances.Hemp seeds, 
unshelled Cannabis sativa461 [32.0/2.2/21.0]Hemp seeds, roasted Cannabis 
sativa560 [44.0/12.0/33.0]Edestin (11S globulin), but not described as 
allergen!Linseed, whole Linum usitatissimum498 [37.0/7.7/22.0]2S albumin: Lin u 
1Observe EU Regulation on consumption restrictionSesame, raw Sesamum indicum; 
Synonym (old): Sesamum orientale593 [50.4/10.2/50.4]2S albumins: Ses i 1 + 
isoform, Ses i 2 + isoform, 7S vicilin: Ses i 3 + Isoform Oleosins: Ses i 4, Ses 
i 5 + isoforms 11S globulin: Ses i 6 + isoform 11S globulin: Ses i 7 + 
isoformNutritional information is based on the German Federal Food Code 3.02 
[12] and is part of the Prodi/Optidiet nutrition software. Table 9.Nutritional 
values and selected allergenic structures of relevant wheat products for the 
assessment of possible risks for cross-reactive allergic reactions (based on 100 
g of the ready-to-eat final product) according to Allergome (www.allergome.org); 
allergens that are additionally documented in the WHO/IUS database 
(www.allergen.org) are presented in bold. FoodEnergy (kilocalories) [fat in g, 
carbohydrates in g, protein in g]Important allergenic structuresNotes (focus 
allergy/food form)Wheat grain Triticum aestivum301 [1.8/59.6/11.7]Profilin: Tri 
a 12 and isoforms LTP: Tri a 14 + isoforms Omega 5 gliadin: Tri a 19Over 100 
described allergen structures (including amylase inhibitors, gliadins, 
glutenins, serine protease inhibitors, thiol reductases); 15/28 allergens 
already documented at WHO/IUIS as food allergens.Gluten395 [4.0/7.0/81.0]Seitan 
(Triticum aestivum)115 [1.7/1.8/22.4]Nutritional information is based on the 
German Federal Food Code 3.02 [12] and is part of the Prodi/Optidiet nutrition 
software. Figure 3Classification of foods according to NOVA classification. 
Based on [128, 129].


8. Egypt J Immunol. 2022 Oct;29(4):1-11.

Pollen sensitization among Egyptian patients with respiratory allergic diseases.

Mohamed MF(1), Refaat MM(1), Melek NA(1), Ahmed EA(1), Noor Aldin NM(1), Abdel 
Latif OM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Allergy & Clinical Immunology, 
Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt.

Pollen is responsible for seasonal allergies, such as allergic 
rhino-conjunctivitis (AR), and has become a growing public health concern. 
Climate change affects the range of allergenic species as well as the timing and 
length of the pollen season. In Egypt, data on pollinosis are scarce. This study 
aimed to identify the most prevalent pollen causing allergies among Egyptian 
patients with respiratory allergies. A total of 200 patients with respiratory 
allergic diseases, allergic rhinitis and/or bronchial asthma (BA), were 
included. Medical history taking and physical examinations were conducted on 
each patient. Complete blood count (CBC), total immunoglobulin E (IgE) 
determination, spirometry, specific IgE, and skin prick tests (SPTs) for common 
aeroallergens and food were performed. Of the 200 patients, 106 (53%) were 
females. The age of study subjects ranged 16-66 years (mean ± SD, 34.42 ± 13.0), 
and 65% were living in urban areas. Grass pollen, mainly from Timothy grass and 
maize, were the most prevalent allergens (28.5%). Timothy grass was the most 
common type of pollen in patients with AR (28.3 %). Elder pollen was more 
prevalent among asthmatic patients (P = 0.004). Bermuda grass was statistically 
more prevalent in rural than in urban areas (P = 0.008). Maize was linked to 
uncontrolled BA, whereas Timothy grass was the most prevalent among patients 
with moderate/severe AR. Forty-three patients had oral allergy syndrome; oranges 
and tomatoes were the most cross-reactive food allergies (12% and 11.5%, 
respectively). Exacerbation of allergic symptoms was noted during January, 
December, March, and June. In conclusion, pollen plays a substantial role in 
affecting patients with respiratory allergies in Egypt. Grass pollen is the most 
prevalent type of pollen, especially in urban areas.

Copyright© by the Egyptian Association of Immunologists.

PMID: 36197149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Transgenic Res. 2022 Oct;31(4-5):507-524. doi: 10.1007/s11248-022-00316-8.
Epub  2022 Aug 8.

Biochemical and clinical studies of putative allergens to assess what 
distinguishes them from other non-allergenic proteins in the same family.

Glenn KC(1), Silvanovich A(1), Lee SG(2)(3), Allen A(2), Park S(4), Dunn SE(1), 
Kessenich C(1), Meng C(1), Vicini JL(5), Jez JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Bayer Crop Science, 700 Chesterfield Pkwy W, Chesterfield, MO, 63017, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Washington University, CB 1137, One Brookings Dr., St. 
Louis, MO, 63130, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of North Carolina 
Wilmington, Wilmington, NC, 28403, USA.
(4)Allergy and Asthma Care of St. Louis, 8888 Ladue Road, Suite 105, St. Louis, 
MO, 63124, USA.
(5)Bayer Crop Science, 700 Chesterfield Pkwy W, Chesterfield, MO, 63017, USA. 
john.vicini@bayer.com.

Many protein families have numerous members listed in databases as allergens; 
however, some allergen database entries, herein called "orphan allergens", are 
members of large families of which all other members are not allergens. These 
orphan allergens provide an opportunity to assess whether specific structural 
features render a protein allergenic. Three orphan allergens [Cladosporium 
herbarum aldehyde dehydrogenase (ChALDH), Alternaria alternata ALDH (AaALDH), 
and C. herbarum mannitol dehydrogenase (ChMDH)] were recombinantly produced and 
purified for structure characterization and for clinical skin prick testing 
(SPT) in mold allergic participants. Examination of the X-ray crystal structures 
of ChALDH and ChMDH and a homology structure model of AaALDH did not identify 
any discernable epitopes that distinguish these putative orphan allergens from 
their non-allergenic protein relatives. SPT results were aligned with ChMDH 
being an allergen, 53% of the participants were SPT (+). AaALDH did not elicit 
SPT reactivity above control proteins not in allergen databases (i.e., 
Psedomonas syringae indole-3-acetaldehyde dehydrogenase and Zea mays ALDH). 
Although published results showed consequential human IgE reactivity with 
ChALDH, no SPT reactivity was observed in this study. With only one of these 
three orphan allergens, ChMDH, eliciting SPT(+) reactions consistent with the 
protein being included in allergen databases, this underscores the complicated 
nature of how bioinformatics is used to assess the potential allergenicity of 
food proteins that could be newly added to human diets and, when needed, the 
subsequent clinical testing of that bioinformatic assessment.Trial registration 
number and date of registration AAC-2017-0467, approved as WIRB protocol 
#20172536 on 07DEC2017 by WIRB-Copernicus (OHRP/FDA Registration #: IRB00000533, 
organization #: IORG0000432).

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11248-022-00316-8
PMCID: PMC9489553
PMID: 35939227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None for A. Allen, J. M. Jez, S. G. Lee and S. 
Parks. The other authors (S. E. Dunn, K. Glenn, C. Kessinich, C. Meng, A. 
Silvanovich and J. Vicini) are employees of Bayer Crop Science and were provided 
financial support in the form of authors’ salaries and research materials.


10. Pediatr Neonatol. 2022 Sep;63(5):520-526. doi: 10.1016/j.pedneo.2022.03.019. 
Epub 2022 Jun 22.

Prevalence, clinical presentation, and associated atopic diseases of pediatric 
fruit and vegetable allergy: A population-based study.

Li SK(1), Liu Z(2), Huang CK(3), Wu TC(4), Huang CF(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yonghe Cardinal Tien Hospital, New Taipei, Taiwan; 
Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department of 
Pediatrics, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Emergency Department, Department of Emergency and Critical Medicine, Wan Fang 
Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Emergency, 
School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, 
Taiwan; Department of Pediatrics, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University, 
Taipei, Taiwan; Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and 
Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(3)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department 
of Pediatrics, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of 
Pediatrics, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taoyuan Branch, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department 
of Pediatrics, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic 
address: tcwu@yahoo.com.
(5)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department 
of Pediatrics, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; School of 
Medicine, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: 
h-cf@yahoo.com.tw.

BACKGROUND: In children, fruit and vegetable allergies are often overlooked 
compared with well-known allergies such as those to eggs, milk, and shellfish. 
Therefore, this study aimed to analyze fruit and vegetable allergies in 
children, including prevalence, types of food allergens, clinical presentation, 
management, and associated comorbid atopic diseases.
METHODS: In 2012, a nationwide, cross-sectional, random sampling 
questionnaire-based survey for common fruit and vegetable allergies was 
conducted in Taiwan. Information regarding these plant food allergies was 
collected. Physicians diagnosed food allergies according to the descriptions of 
convincing symptoms. Enrolled questionnaires were reviewed by expert 
pediatricians.
RESULTS: A total of 9,982 valid questionnaires were analyzed. The overall 
prevalence of fruit and vegetable allergies was 5.6% (n = 560) and 3.0% 
(n = 304), respectively. The most common fruit allergen was mango, followed by 
kiwifruit, whereas taro and bamboo shoot were the most common vegetable 
allergens. Meanwhile, most allergic symptoms were of the mucocutaneous tissue, 
followed by the upper airway and gastrointestinal tract. Most only required 
avoidance of allergens and not medical treatment. Children with fruit or 
vegetable allergies had a higher percentage of comorbid atopic dermatitis, 
allergic rhinitis, and asthma than those without food allergies; additionally, 
the proportion of comorbid atopic diseases was similar between fruit and 
vegetable allergies and shellfish allergy. One child developed anaphylaxis due 
to a corn allergy.
CONCLUSIONS: Fruits and vegetables are common food allergens in Taiwanese 
children who present with diverse and potentially severe symptoms. Children with 
plant food allergies had a percentage of comorbid atopic diseases similar to 
that of shellfish allergy, the most common allergen. These findings indicate the 
importance of considering fruit and vegetable allergies in children.

Copyright © 2022 Taiwan Pediatric Association. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pedneo.2022.03.019
PMID: 35811287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]