1. J Proteome Res. 2025 May 2;24(5):2336-2348. doi:
10.1021/acs.jproteome.3c00456.  Epub 2025 Apr 15.

Proteomic Profiling of Celiac-Toxic Motifs and Allergens in Cereals Containing 
Gluten.

Daly ME(1), Huang X(2), Nitride C(3), Hughes C(4), Tanskanen J(5), Shewry PR(6), 
Gethings LA(1)(4)(7), Mills ENC(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, School of Biological Sciences, 
Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, The University of Manchester, 
Princess Street, Manchester M1 7DN, U.K.
(2)Department of Food and Nutrition, University of Helsinki, Agnes Sjöberginkatu 
2, PL 66, Helsinki FI-00014, Finland.
(3)Department of Agricultural Sciences, University of Naples Federico II, 
Portici 80055, Italy.
(4)Waters Corporation, Stamford Avenue, Wilmslow SK9 4AX, U.K.
(5)Natural Resources Institute (LUKE), Viikinkaari 1, Helsinki 00710, Finland.
(6)Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, Herts AL5 2JQ, U.K.
(7)School of School of Biosciences and Medicine, The University of Surrey, 
Guildford GU2 7XH, U.K.

Cereal-based foods can cause immune-mediated adverse reactions, including celiac 
disease and IgE-mediated allergies, but the potency of different cereal species 
to cause such reactions appears to vary, with oats being less celiac-toxic and 
allergenic than wheat. In order to define differences in the immunological 
potential of wheat, barley, rye, and oats, proteomic profiling of proteins 
carrying celiac-toxic motifs and allergens has been undertaken. Total protein 
extracts were subjected to chymotryptic digestion and analyzed using 
data-independent ion mobility mass spectrometry and a pipeline employing a 
curated gluten protein sequence database. Depending on the cereal species, 
376-2769 proteins were identified, the majority being grain storage proteins. 
Relative quantitation of proteins containing celiac-toxic motifs showed that 
they were most abundant and diverse in wheat, with only a limited number, at 
much lower abundance, identified in oats. Allergens belonging to the seed 
storage prolamins were the most abundant, while allergens belonging to the 
α-amylase/trypsin inhibitor family associated with respiratory allergy were of 
only moderate abundance in comparison. Wheat allergen homologues were identified 
in other cereal species but at a very low level in oats. These data suggest that 
the relative risk of oats in the context of both celiac disease and IgE-mediated 
allergy is low.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.3c00456
PMCID: PMC12053943
PMID: 40234187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following competing 
financial interest(s): MD and LG are employees of Waters Corporation, a 
manufacturer of chromatographic and mass spectrometry equipment. MD completed 
this work prior to being employed by Waters Corporation, whilst studying for a 
PhD degree at the University of Manchester.


2. Food Funct. 2025 Mar 17;16(6):2461-2473. doi: 10.1039/d4fo05757k.

Dietary methionine restriction restores wheat gluten-induced celiac-associated 
small intestine damage in association with affecting butyric acid production by 
intestinal flora.

Yu T(1)(2)(3)(4), Gao J(3)(4), Yuan J(1)(5)(4), Yin Z(1)(2)(3)(4), Chen 
X(1)(2)(3)(4), Wu Y(1)(2)(3)(4), Dai R(1)(2)(3)(4), Yan D(1)(2)(3)(4), Chen 
H(1)(2)(4), Wu Y(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Resources, Nanchang University, 
Nanchang 330047, Jiangxi, China. ericyo918@hotmail.com.
(2)Sino-German Joint Research Institute, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330047, 
Jiangxi, China.
(3)School of Food Science and Technology, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, 
Jiangxi, China.
(4)Jiangxi Province Key Laboratory of Food Allergy, Nanchang University, 
Nanchang, 330047, Jiangxi, China.
(5)School of Pharmaceutical Science, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330006, 
Jiangxi, China.

Methionine restriction has received some attention in recent years as a novel 
mode of dietary intervention. Our previous study found that methionine 
restriction could inhibit the celiac toxic effects of wheat gluten in an in 
vitro model. However, the role of methionine restriction in gluten-induced 
celiac intestinal damage remains unclear. The aim of this study was to explore 
whether dietary methionine restriction could suppress the celiac toxic effects 
of gluten in an in vivo model, thereby mitigating intestine damage. This study 
systematically investigated the effects of dietary methionine restriction on 
celiac characteristic indicators such as symptoms, small intestine damage, and 
intestinal TG2 and IL-15 expression in a gluten-induced C57BL/6 mouse model. The 
availability of dietary methionine restriction in different ages (adolescent and 
adult) was also evaluated. Moreover, mouse cecum contents were assayed and 
co-analyzed for the metagenome of intestinal flora and target short-chain fatty 
acid metabolomics, with the goal of further exploring and elucidating critical 
pathways by which dietary methionine restriction plays a role. We discovered 
that dietary methionine restriction could effectively ameliorate the 
gluten-induced celiac-associated small intestine damage by modulating intestinal 
flora to inhibit butyric acid production. Specifically, dietary methionine 
restriction could inhibit butyric acid production with the help of s_CAG-485 
sp002493045 and s_CAG-475 sp910577815, which in turn affected the mitochondrial 
function within the intestinal epithelial cells to assist in the repair of 
intestine damage. This study might provide new insights into modulating dietary 
patterns to mitigate intestinal damage in celiac disease and the production of 
novel gluten-free products.

DOI: 10.1039/d4fo05757k
PMID: 40018976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Am J Gastroenterol. 2025 Jan 16. doi: 10.14309/ajg.0000000000003318. Online 
ahead of print.

Molecular Triggers of Non-celiac Wheat Sensitivity: A Scoping Review and 
Analysis.

An C(1)(2), Yang J(3), Pinto-Sanchez MI(4), Verdu EF(4), Lebwohl B(2)(5), Green 
PH(2)(5), Alaedini A(1)(2)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Nutrition, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Division of Digestive & Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine, Columbia 
University, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Health Informatics Institute, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, 
USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Farncombe Family Digestive Health Research Institute, 
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Celiac Disease Center, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York Medical 
College, Valhalla, New York, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Nonceliac wheat sensitivity (NCWS) is characterized by a 
symptomatic response to the ingestion of foods containing wheat and related 
cereal grains in the absence of celiac disease or wheat allergy. Despite efforts 
to identify the constituent component(s) of wheat responsible for triggering 
NCWS, no consensus has emerged, leading to competing claims. We aimed to 
systematically evaluate the literature and provide an evidence-based conclusion 
on the contribution of specific wheat components to NCWS.
METHODS: A comprehensive search of multiple bibliographic databases was 
conducted, focusing on primary research. Data were systematically analyzed, and 
methodological gaps were identified.
RESULTS: The search identified 175 unique citations, revealing 3 categories of 
compounds frequently considered as potential triggers of NCWS: gluten, 
fermentable carbohydrates, and amylase/trypsin inhibitors (ATIs). Among 16 
double-blind placebo-controlled studies, 8 reported a greater symptomatic 
response to gluten than the control. Only 1 controlled study examined 
fermentable carbohydrates, finding a modest effect, but the tested carbohydrates 
were not derived from wheat. No eligible studies assessed ATIs or other 
wheat-related compounds as potential NCWS triggers. Across studies, significant 
limitations and methodological inconsistencies were noted, particularly in 
participant selection, challenge protocols, and data reporting.
DISCUSSION: Gluten is the most extensively investigated wheat component linked 
to NCWS, but evidence for its role is inconsistent and undermined by 
methodological limitations. No direct evidence currently links wheat fermentable 
carbohydrates, ATIs, or other components to NCWS symptoms. The existing evidence 
is insufficient to justify restricting specific components of wheat in the 
management of NCWS. Future studies must overcome the identified gaps to 
rigorously investigate the role of wheat and related cereals in NCWS, with the 
potential to advance diagnosis and treatment.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of The American College of Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.14309/ajg.0000000000003318
PMID: 39951359


4. Nutrients. 2025 Jan 8;17(2):220. doi: 10.3390/nu17020220.

Non-Celiac Gluten/Wheat Sensitivity-State of the Art: A Five-Year Narrative 
Review.

Manza F(1)(2), Lungaro L(1), Costanzini A(1), Caputo F(1), Carroccio A(3)(4), 
Mansueto P(4), Seidita A(3)(4)(5), Raju SA(2), Volta U(6), De Giorgio R(1), 
Sanders DS(2), Caio G(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medicine, University of Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, 
Italy.
(2)Academic Unit of Gastroenterology, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Sheffield S5 7AT, UK.
(3)Unit of Internal Medicine, "V. Cervello" Hospital, Ospedali Riuniti "Villa 
Sofia-Cervello", 90146 Palermo, Italy.
(4)Department of Health Promotion Sciences, Maternal and Infant Care, Internal 
Medicine and Medical Specialties (PROMISE), University of Palermo, 90127 
Palermo, Italy.
(5)Institute for Biomedical Research and Innovation (IRIB), National Research 
Council (CNR), 90146 Palermo, Italy.
(6)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Bologna, 40138 
Bologna, Italy.
(7)Mucosal Immunology and Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General 
Hospital-Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Background: Non-celiac gluten/wheat sensitivity (NCGWS) is a syndrome for which 
pathogenesis and management remain debated. It is described as a condition 
characterized by gastrointestinal and extra-intestinal symptoms rapidly 
occurring after gluten ingestion in subjects who have had celiac disease or 
wheat allergy excluded. To date, the diagnosis of NCGWS is challenging as no 
universally recognized biomarkers have been yet identified, nor has a 
predisposing genetic profile been described. However, the research is moving 
fast, and new data regarding pathogenic pathways, patients' classification, 
potential candidate biomarkers, and dietary interventions are emerging. Methods: 
This literature review aims to address the state of the art and summarize the 
latest updates in this field from 2019 to date. Results and Conclusions: 
Clinical studies regarding NCGWS in the last five years are reported to shed 
light on this complex condition and to guide specialists towards a more 
in-depth, prompt, and objective diagnosis.

DOI: 10.3390/nu17020220
PMCID: PMC11767908
PMID: 39861350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


5. Front Allergy. 2025 Jan 9;5:1505834. doi: 10.3389/falgy.2024.1505834. 
eCollection 2024.

Intestinal permeability, food antigens and the microbiome: a multifaceted 
perspective.

Valitutti F(1)(2), Mennini M(3), Monacelli G(1), Fagiolari G(1), Piccirillo 
M(3), Di Nardo G(3), Di Cara G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Surgery, Pediatric Unit, University of Perugia, 
Perugia, Italy.
(2)European Biomedical Research Institute of Salerno (EBRIS), Salerno, Italy.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, Mental Health and Sensory Organs (NESMOS), 
Faculty of Medicine and Psychology, Sapienza University of Rome, Pediatric Unit, 
Sant'Andrea University Hospital, Rome, Italy.

The gut barrier encompasses several interactive, physical, and functional 
components, such as the gut microbiota, the mucus layer, the epithelial layer 
and the gut mucosal immunity. All these contribute to homeostasis in a 
well-regulated manner. Nevertheless, this frail balance might be disrupted for 
instance by westernized dietary habits, infections, pollution or exposure to 
antibiotics, thus diminishing protective immunity and leading to the onset of 
chronic diseases. Several gaps of knowledge still exist as regards this 
multi-level interaction. In this review we aim to summarize current evidence 
linking food antigens, microbiota and gut permeability interference in diverse 
disease conditions such as celiac disease (CeD), non-celiac wheat sensitivity 
(NCWS), food allergies (FA), eosinophilic gastrointestinal disorder (EOGID) and 
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Specific food elimination diets are recommended 
for CeD, NCWS, FA and in some cases for EOGID. Undoubtfully, each of these 
conditions is very different and quite unique, albeit food antigens/compounds, 
intestinal permeability and specific microbiota signatures orchestrate immune 
response and decide clinical outcomes for all of them.

© 2025 Valitutti, Mennini, Monacelli, Fagiolari, Piccirillo, Di Nardo and Di 
Cara.

DOI: 10.3389/falgy.2024.1505834
PMCID: PMC11754301
PMID: 39850945

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.


6. Semin Immunol. 2025 Mar;77:101930. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2025.101930. Epub 2025 
Jan 9.

Celiac disease, non-celiac wheat sensitivity, wheat allergy - clinical and 
diagnostic aspects.

Størdal K(1), Kurppa K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Research, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Department of Paediatrics, Oslo 
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. Electronic address: 
Ketil.stordal@medisin.uio.no.
(2)Celiac Disease Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, 
Tampere University, Tampere, Finland; Tampere Centre for Child, Adolescent and 
Maternal Health Research, Tampere University and Tampere University Hospital, 
Tampere, Finland; The Wellbeing Services County of Pirkanmaa, Finland; The 
University Consortium of Seinäjoki, Seinäjoki, Finland. Electronic address: 
kalle.kurppa@tuni.fi.

In recent years, wheat- and gluten-free diets have increased in demand due to 
reported increases in various conditions reported to be driven by ingredients of 
these food products. Celiac disease, wheat allergy and non-celiac wheat 
sensitivity constitute the three main categories of wheat-related disorders. 
Celiac disease is a well-characterized immune-mediated disease caused by immune 
reaction against specific gliadin epitopes, the main protein in wheat. Screening 
studies of samples collected over time bring evidence that there is a true 
increase in prevalence not only driven by increased testing activity. Clinical 
presentation of CeD is diverse and there is an increased risk of autoimmune 
co-morbidities. Wheat allergy consists of IgE- and non-IgE-mediated reactions, 
driven by Th2-cells directing eosinophil and basophil responses. Rapid 
IgE-mediated reactions are characterized by specific IgE antibodies in 
conjunction with symptoms originating especially from the respiratory and 
gastrointestinal tract. There is an increased risk of other allergies and the 
majority recover during adolescence. Non-IgE-mediated wheat allergy is a 
less-well defined condition, which is often diagnostically challenging due to a 
longer interval between exposure and symptoms and lack of non-invasive 
biomarkers. In this condition, wheat as a trigger needs to be established by 
exclusion followed by dietary challenge. Non-celiac wheat sensitivity, despite 
being the most recently recognized, has the highest reported prevalence among 
the three wheat-related entities. It remains, however, particularly poorly 
characterized due to unclear pathophysiology and lack of diagnostic markers. 
This narrative review will scrutinize the shared and distinct clinical features 
of the three wheat-related conditions, focusing on epidemiology, clinical 
presentation, co-morbidities, diagnosis, treatment and prognosis.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.smim.2025.101930
PMID: 39793259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Nutrition. 2025 Mar;131:112642. doi: 10.1016/j.nut.2024.112642. Epub 2024 Nov 
28.

Food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome after involuntary gluten 
transgression in celiac children: A new increasingly common complication?

Trillo Belizón C(1), García Barrionuevo C(1), Muñoz-Cruzado Rosete A(2), Ramos 
Rodríguez A(1), Lozano Sánchez G(1), Ramón Salguero JM(1).

Author information:
(1)UGC Pediatrics, Hospital de la Axarquía, Vélez-Málaga, Málaga, Spain.
(2)UGC Pediatrics, Hospital de la Axarquía, Vélez-Málaga, Málaga, Spain. 
Electronic address: adrianmcr1992@gmail.com.

Among the possible adverse reactions to gluten, celiac disease, non-celiac 
gluten sensitivity, and IgE-mediated wheat allergy have been classically 
described. A non-IgE-mediated reaction similar to food protein-induced 
enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES) after inadvertent gluten ingestion in a celiac 
patient was recently reported. We present three children affected by celiac 
disease with exquisite control, including appropriate adherence to an exclusion 
diet, who suffered a severe adverse food reaction after unappreciated outdoor 
ingestion of gluten, meeting the criteria for a definitive diagnosis of FPIES. 
The strict and prolonged exclusion of gluten from the diet is postulated as the 
possible trigger for this serious entity after an involuntary transgression. 
Although the first published cases are recent, we might be witnessing an 
increase in the frequency of presentation. Therefore, we believe emergency 
services must be alert to the possibility of diagnosis of FPIES in celiac 
patients due to involuntary transgressions. The determination of gluten 
glycoimmunopeptides in urine or stool samples may be useful for certifying the 
inadvertent consumption of wheat as the cause of FPIES.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nut.2024.112642
PMID: 39740282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


8. ACS Omega. 2024 Dec 3;9(50):49767-49777. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.4c08411. 
eCollection 2024 Dec 17.

Rapid Gluten Allergen Detection Using an Integrated Photoimaging Assay and Ionic 
Liquid Extraction Sensor.

Chen WH(1)(2), Hsu CC(3)(4), Ho HJ(5), Smith J(1), Smith S(1), Huang HY(1), 
Chang HC(6), Hsiao YC(7)(8)(2).

Author information:
(1)Research and Development Group, Leo Verification Systems Inc., Powell, 
Wyoming 82435, United States.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 639798 
Singapore.
(3)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 
110, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Surgery, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei 110, 
Taiwan.
(5)Technology Commercialization Center, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, 
Taiwan.
(6)uMeal Co., Ltd., Taipei 110, Taiwan.
(7)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Optomechatronics, Taipei Medical University, 
Taipei 110, Taiwan.
(8)Cell Physiology and Molecular Image Research Center, Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei 110, Taiwan.

In recent years, food allergies and food sensitivities have remained critical 
public health problems that affect approximately 15% of the global population. 
Wheat is a major food source worldwide, but it is also a common food allergen. 
Celiac disease is chronic immune-mediated enteropathy triggered by exposure to 
dietary gluten in genetically predisposed individuals; it can be treated only 
through strict gluten avoidance. Therefore, rapid gluten detection is crucial 
for protecting the health of patients. Gluten contains two primary 
water-insoluble proteins: gliadin and glutenin. Gliadin is a key contributor to 
celiac disease and poses challenges for sample pretreatment owing to its 
insolubility, thereby reducing the accuracy and sensitivity of detection 
systems. Rapid sample processing is a critical problem in gliadin detection. In 
this report, we developed a gliadin sensor system called the integrated food 
allergy and microorganism sensor (iFAMs). The iFAMs comprises a gliadin lateral 
flow chip, a one-pot extraction solution, and an image assay app. The iFAMs 
enables gliadin extraction and detection in under 2 min with high sensitivity 
(0.04 mg/kg for gliadin, lower than the regulatory limit of 20 mg/kg). Users can 
easily measure gluten concentrations in samples and quantify gliadin levels 
using the smartphone-based image assay app. In samples collected from 
restaurants, the iFAMs successfully detected hidden gluten within "gluten-free" 
food items. The compact size and user-friendly design of the iFAMs render it 
suitable for not only consumers but also clinicians, food industries, and 
regulators to enhance food safety.

© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.4c08411
PMCID: PMC11656241
PMID: 39713688

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.


9. Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins. 2025 Jun;17(3):1513-1522. doi: 
10.1007/s12602-024-10416-y. Epub 2024 Dec 14.

Postbiotics: As a Promising Tools in the Treatment of Celiac Disease.

Khani N(1)(2), Bonyadi M(3), Soleimani RA(2), Raziabad RH(4), Ahmadi M(4), 
Homayouni-Rad A(5).

Author information:
(1)Student Research Committee, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran.
(2)Department of Food Science and Technology, Faculty of Nutrition & Food 
Sciences, Nutrition Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, 
Tabriz, Iran.
(3)Department of Food Hygiene and Quality Control, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Student Research Committee, Department of Food Science and Technology, 
National Nutrition and Food Technology Research Institute, Faculty of Nutrition 
Science and Food Technology, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Food Science and Technology, Faculty of Nutrition & Food 
Sciences, Nutrition Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, 
Tabriz, Iran. homayounia@tbzmed.ac.ir.

Celiac disease (CD) can be considered an autoimmune problem, a disease caused by 
gluten sensitivity in the body. Gluten is found in foods such as barley, wheat, 
and rye. This ailment manifests in individuals with hereditary susceptibility 
and under the sway of environmental stimulants, counting, in addition to gluten 
and intestinal microbiota dysbiosis. Currently, the only recommended treatment 
for this condition is to follow a gluten-free diet for life. In this review, we 
scrutinized the studies of recent years that focused on the use of postbiotics 
in vitro and in vivo in CD. The investigation of postbiotics in CD could be 
intriguing to observe their diverse effects on several pathways. This study 
highlights the definitions, characteristics, and safety issues of postbiotics 
and their possible biological role in the prevention and treatment of CD, as 
well as their application in the food and drug industry.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12602-024-10416-y
PMID: 39673575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of Interest: The authors 
declare no competing interests.


10. Plant Foods Hum Nutr. 2024 Dec 12;80(1):8. doi: 10.1007/s11130-024-01264-w.

Gluten-free Diet, a Friend or a Foe, an American Perspective.

Alam T(1), Saripalli G(1), Rustgi S(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, Clemson University Pee Dee 
Research and Education Center, Florence, SC, 29506, USA.
(2)Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, Clemson University Pee Dee 
Research and Education Center, Florence, SC, 29506, USA. srustgi@clemson.edu.
(3)School of Health Research, Clemson University, Clemson, SC, 29634, USA. 
srustgi@clemson.edu.
(4)Center for Human Genetics, Clemson University, Greenwood, SC, 29646, USA. 
srustgi@clemson.edu.

Gluten proteins in cereal grains are often considered unsafe for health. Indeed, 
the dissemination of misinformation through various sources has led to a 
widespread misconception that the consumption of gluten by healthy individuals 
results in adverse health consequences and contributes to obesity. In recent 
years, many health-conscious consumers have started reducing or avoiding gluten 
consumption without a medical recommendation. Consequently, the adoption of 
gluten-free diets has expanded significantly. This study compared 39 gluten-free 
products and their gluten-containing counterparts for energy, sugar, dietary 
fiber content, and price. We found that, on average, gluten-free products 
available to United States consumers contained significantly less protein and 
more sugar and calories. Furthermore, on average, gluten-free products are more 
expensive than gluten-containing products. Our finding may serve as a guide for 
dietitians, nutritionists, and legislators in introducing a gluten-free 
prescription list for individuals with celiac disease, wheat allergy, and 
non-celiac wheat sensitivity.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11130-024-01264-w
PMID: 39666134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics Approval: Not applicable. 
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.