1. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2024 Feb;9(2):110-123. doi: 
10.1016/S2468-1253(23)00317-5. Epub 2023 Nov 28.

The effect of expectancy versus actual gluten intake on gastrointestinal and 
extra-intestinal symptoms in non-coeliac gluten sensitivity: a randomised, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled, international, multicentre study.

de Graaf MCG(1), Lawton CL(2), Croden F(2), Smolinska A(3), Winkens B(4), 
Hesselink MAM(1), van Rooy G(1), Weegels PL(5), Shewry PR(6), Houghton LA(7), 
Witteman BJM(8), Keszthelyi D(1), Brouns FJPH(9), Dye L(10), Jonkers DMAE(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology-Hepatology, Maastricht University Medical 
Center+, Maastricht, Netherlands; NUTRIM School of Nutrition and Translational 
Research in Metabolism, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(2)School of Psychology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(3)NUTRIM School of Nutrition and Translational Research in Metabolism, 
Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands; Department of Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(4)Department of Methodology and Statistics, Care and Public Health Research 
Institute, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(5)Laboratory of Food Chemistry, Wageningen University and Research, Wageningen, 
Netherlands; European Bakery Innovation Centre, Sonneveld Group, Papendrecht, 
Netherlands.
(6)Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, UK.
(7)Division of Gastroenterology and Surgical Sciences, Leeds Institute of 
Medical Research, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK; Division of Gastroenterology 
and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(8)Division of Human Nutrition, Wageningen University and Research, Wageningen, 
Netherlands; Division of Gastroenterology-Hepatology, Gelderse Vallei Hospital, 
Ede, Netherlands.
(9)NUTRIM School of Nutrition and Translational Research in Metabolism, 
Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands; Department of Human Biology, 
Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(10)School of Psychology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK; School of Food Science 
and Nutrition, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(11)Department of Gastroenterology-Hepatology, Maastricht University Medical 
Center+, Maastricht, Netherlands; NUTRIM School of Nutrition and Translational 
Research in Metabolism, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands. 
Electronic address: d.jonkers@maastrichtuniversity.nl.

Erratum in
    Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2024 Mar;9(3):e8. doi: 
10.1016/S2468-1253(24)00014-1.

BACKGROUND: Many individuals without coeliac disease or wheat allergy reduce 
their gluten intake because they believe that gluten causes their 
gastrointestinal symptoms. Symptoms could be affected by negative expectancy. 
Therefore, we aimed to investigate the effects of expectancy versus actual 
gluten intake on symptoms in people with non-coeliac gluten sensitivity (NCGS).
METHODS: This randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, international, 
multicentre study was done at the University of Leeds (Leeds, UK), Maastricht 
University (Maastricht, the Netherlands), and Wageningen University and Research 
(Wageningen, the Netherlands). People aged 18-70 years with self-reported NCGS 
(ie, gastrointestinal symptoms within 8 h of gluten consumption) without coeliac 
disease and wheat allergy were recruited. Participants had to follow a 
gluten-free or gluten-restricted diet for at least 1 week before (and 
throughout) study participation and had to be asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic 
(overall gastrointestinal symptom score ≤30 mm on the Visual Analogue Scale 
[VAS]) while on the diet. Participants were randomly assigned (1:1:1:1; blocks 
of eight; stratified by site and gender) to one of four groups based on the 
expectation to consume gluten-containing (E+) or gluten-free (E-) oat bread for 
breakfast and lunch (two slices each) and actual intake of gluten-containing 
(G+) or gluten-free (G-) oat bread. Participants, investigators, and those 
assessing outcomes were masked to the actual gluten assignment, and participants 
were also masked to the expectancy part of the study. The primary outcome was 
overall gastrointestinal symptom score on the VAS, which was measured at and 
corrected for baseline (before breakfast) and hourly for 8 h, with lunch served 
after 4 h, and analysed per-protocol. Safety analysis included all participants 
incorporated in the per-protocol analysis. The study is registered at 
ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT05779358, and has ended.
FINDINGS: Between Oct 19, 2018, and Feb 14, 2022, 165 people were screened and 
84 were randomly assigned to E+G+ (n=21), E+G- (n=21), E-G+ (n=20), or E-G- 
(n=22). One person in the E+G+ group was excluded due to not following test day 
instructions, leaving 83 participants in the per-protocol analysis. Median age 
was 27·0 years (IQR 21·0-45·0), 71 (86%) of 83 people were women, and 12 (14%) 
were men. Mean overall gastrointestinal symptom score was significantly higher 
for E+G+ (16·6 mm [95% CI 13·1 to 20·0]) than for E-G+ (6·9 mm [3·5 to 10·4]; 
difference 9·6 mm [95% CI 3·0 to 16·2], p=0·0010) and E-G- (7·4 mm [4·2 to 
10·7]; difference 9·1 mm [2·7 to 15·6], p=0·0016), but not for E+G- (11·7 mm 
[8·3 to 15·1]; difference 4·9 mm [-1·7 to 11·5], p=0·28). There was no 
difference between E+G- and E-G+ (difference 4·7 mm [-1·8 to 11·3], p=0·33), 
E+G- and E-G- (difference 4·2 mm [-2·2 to 10·7], p=0·47), and E-G+ and E-G- 
(difference -0·5 mm [-7·0 to 5·9], p=1·0). Adverse events were reported by two 
participants in the E+G- group (itching jaw [n=1]; feeling lightheaded and 
stomach rumbling [n=1]) and one participant in the E-G+ group (vomiting).
INTERPRETATION: The combination of expectancy and actual gluten intake had the 
largest effect on gastrointestinal symptoms, reflecting a nocebo effect, 
although an additional effect of gluten cannot be ruled out. Our results 
necessitate further research into the possible involvement of the gut-brain 
interaction in NCGS.
FUNDING: Government of the Netherlands Topsector Agri & Food Top Consortium for 
Knowledge and Innovation, AB Mauri Global Bakery Ingredients, Baking Industry 
Research Trust, Borgesius-Albert Heijn, CSM Innovation Centre, the International 
Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT), DSM Food Specialties, Fazer, 
Healthgrain Forum, the International Association for Cereal Science and 
Technology, the International Wheat Gluten Association, Lantmännen, Mondelez 
International, Nederlands Bakkerij Centrum, Nutrition & Santé, Puratos, 
Rademaker, Sonneveld Group, and Zeelandia HJ Doeleman.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2468-1253(23)00317-5
PMID: 38040019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests MCGdG, CLL, FC, MAMH, 
and GvR report partial financing by a public–private partnership grant from 
Topsector Agri & Food Top Consortium for Knowledge and Innovation (TKI) for Well 
on Wheat? (TKI16060BMNU). AS reports consulting fees and financial support for 
conference attendance from Owlstone Medical (all outside submitted work). PLW 
reports part employment by the European Bakery Innovation Centre, Sonneveld 
Group, who provided the study breads; Sonneveld Group received payment from a 
public–private partnership grant of TKI Well on Wheat? (TKI16060BMNU) for 
providing the study bread. PRS reports a public–private partnership grant of TKI 
Well on Wheat? (TKI16060BMNU), Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board 
Studentship Project grant (061), FIBRAXFUN grant, the Biotechnology and 
Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC) grant (BB/S013954/1, BBSRC 
BB/S020101/1, BBSRC BB/T013923/1, and BBSRC BB/W01792X/1), and the Engineering 
and Physical Sciences Research Council grant (EP/S01679/1 GCRF Hub SANC South 
Asian Nitrogen Hub); an honorarium for membership of the Editorial Board of the 
Journal of Cereal Science (Elsevier); payment for conference flight, hotel, and 
registration costs by Gluten Workshop Madrid, Wheat Research Updates Norway, 8th 
International Conference on Dietary Fiber, From Seed to Pasta IV, and the 
British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology; being a member of the Irish 
Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine grant board (paid to self); and 
employment at Rothamsted Research, which receive strategic funding from the 
BBSRC and whose work forms part of the Designing Future Wheat (BB/P016855/1) and 
Developing Sustainable Wheat (BB/X011003/1) strategic programmes. LAH reports 
acting as a consultant to GSK, Ironwood, and non-paid to Pfizer; receiving 
financial support to attend the Rome V foundation meeting in Chicago, IL, USA, 
in May, 2023; and being a member of the British Society of Gastroenterology 
Neurogastroenterology and Motility Committee and Food and Function Committee 
(all outside submitted work). DK reports receiving research funding from 
Grunenthal, Allergan, ZonMw, MLDS, the Rome Foundation, Horizon 2020, Horizon 
Europe, and United European Gastroenterology; receiving a speaker's fee (paid to 
host institution) from Dr Falk; participating on a data safety and monitoring 
and advisory board for the NUTRECOVER study (no financial reimbursement); and 
being a board member of the Dutch Society of Gastroenterology (no financial 
reimbursement; all outside submitted work). FJPHB reports receiving a 
public–private partnership grant of TKI Well on Wheat? (TKI16060BMNU); 
consulting fees from Lesaffre France; a personal speaker fee and travel cost 
reimbursement from Zeelandia Netherlands; and payment from Zeelandia and 
Lesaffre for travel or hotel costs (paid to institution) for invited scientific 
meetings. LD reports partial financing by a public–private partnership grant of 
TKI Well on Wheat? (TKI16060BMNU); being a past President of the International 
Life Sciences Institute Europe and current Co-Chair of the International Life 
Sciences Institute Global; receiving grant funding from Sanofi Consumer 
Healthcare; and sitting on the Hass Avocado Scientific Advisory Board. DMAEJ 
reports receiving a public–private partnership grant of TKI Well on Wheat? 
(TKI16060BMNU) and TKI grants from Agri & Food and Health Holland (AF18109, 
LWV20.187, LWV21.052, LSHM22057), the Carbokinetics programme as part of the 
Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research–Carbohydrate Competence Center 
partnership, Organic A2BV/Mothersfinest, and Horizon 2020 (DISCOvERIE/848228). 
All other authors declare no competing interests.


2. J Food Biochem. 2022 Sep;46(9):e14185. doi: 10.1111/jfbc.14185. Epub 2022 Apr 
19.

New alternatives from sustainable sources to wheat in bakery foods: Science, 
technology, and challenges.

Siddiqui SA(1)(2), Mahmud MMC(3), Abdi G(4), Wanich U(5), Farooqi MQU(6), 
Settapramote N(7), Khan S(8), Wani SA(9).

Author information:
(1)Technical University of Munich Campus Straubing for Biotechnology and 
Sustainability, Straubing, Germany.
(2)German Institute of Food Technologies (DIL e.V.), Quakenbrück, Germany.
(3)CASS Food Research Centre, School of Exercise and Nutrition Sciences, Deakin 
University, Geelong, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Persian Gulf Research Institute, Persian Gulf 
University, Bushehr, Iran.
(5)Department of Home Economics, Rambhaibarni Rahjabhat University, Chanthaburi, 
Thailand.
(6)School of Agriculture and Environment, The University of Western Australia, 
Perth, Western Australia, Australia.
(7)Department Of Agro-Industry, RaJamangala University of Technology Isan Surin 
Campus, Nogmuang, Surin, Thailand.
(8)Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Tropics and Subtropics Group, 
University of Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany.
(9)Department of Food Technology, Islamic University of Science and Technology, 
Awantipora, India.

Ongoing research in the food industry is striving to replace wheat flour with 
new alternatives from sustainable sources to overcome the disease burden in the 
existing population. Celiac disease, wheat allergy, gluten sensitivity, or 
non-celiac gluten sensitivity are some common disorders associated with gluten 
present in wheat. These scientific findings are crucial to finding appropriate 
alternatives in introducing new ingredients supporting the consumer's 
requirements. Among the alternatives, amaranth, barley, coconut, chestnut, 
maize, millet, teff, oat, rye, sorghum, soy, rice flour, and legumes could be 
considered appropriate due to their chemical composition, bioactive profile, and 
alternatives utilization in the baking industry. Furthermore, the enrichment of 
these alternatives with proper ingredients is considered effective. Literature 
demonstrated that the flours from these alternative sources significantly 
enhanced the physicochemical, pasting, and rheological properties of the doughs. 
These flours boost a significant reduction in gluten proteins associated with 
food intolerance, in comparison with wheat highlighting a visible market 
opportunity with nutritional and organoleptic benefits for food producers. 
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS: New alternatives from sustainable sources to wheat in 
bakery foods as an approach that affects human health. Alternatives from 
sustainable sources are important source of nutrients and bioactive compounds. 
Alternatives from sustainable sources are rising due to nutritional and consumer 
demand in bakery industry. New alternatives from sustainable sources improve 
physicochemical, pasting, and rheological properties of dough. Non-wheat-based 
foods from non-traditional grains have a potential to increase consumer market 
acceptance.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/jfbc.14185
PMID: 35441405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Foods. 2021 Dec 8;10(12):3049. doi: 10.3390/foods10123049.

Gluten-Free Pasta Enriched with Fish By-Product for Special Dietary Uses: 
Technological Quality and Sensory Properties.

Aínsa A(1), Vega A(1), Honrado A(1), Marquina P(1), Roncales P(1), Gracia 
JAB(1), Morales JBC(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto Agroalimentario de Aragón -IA2, Universidad de Zaragoza-CITA, 
Miguel Servet. 177, 50013 Zaragoza, Spain.

Gluten-free pasta enriched with fish can support a nutritive and suitable option 
for people with celiac disease that allows achieving the benefits of fish 
consumption, especially the consumption of Ω-3 fatty acids; however, this 
requires that the pasta has adequate technological and sensory properties. For 
this purpose, four optimal formulations, obtained with an iterative process, 
were analyzed to determine the effect of the different ingredients (yellow corn 
flour, white corn flour, and rice flour) in gluten-free pasta compared to 
commercial wheat pasta. An evaluation of the color, texture, and technological 
properties were conducted, and the pasta was sensorially characterized. The 
enriched gluten-free pasta required shorter cooking times (≈3 min) and was 
characterized by lower hardness, springiness, gumminess, chewiness, and 
fracturability, and had higher values of adhesiveness than wheat pasta. In 
addition, the incorporation of yellow corn gives gluten-free pasta a similarity 
in color to commercial pasta, with a value of ∆E between 5.5 and 8.0. Regarding 
the sensory analysis, gluten-free pasta was characterized by slight fishy aromas 
and flavors with some aftertaste compared to commercial pasta. Finally, the use 
of different cereals to obtain gluten-free pasta could be a good and feasible 
alternative despite the technological and sensory modifications observed.

DOI: 10.3390/foods10123049
PMCID: PMC8701056
PMID: 34945600

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


4. Foods. 2021 Oct 21;10(11):2523. doi: 10.3390/foods10112523.

Gluten-Free Cereal Products and Beverages: A Review of Their Health Benefits in 
the Last Five Years.

Khairuddin MAN(1), Lasekan O(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Technology, University Putra Malaysia UPM, Serdang 43400, 
Malaysia.

In the past decades, food products and beverages made from gluten-free cereals 
were initially created for certain groups of people who experience 
gluten-related disorders such as wheat allergies, gluten ataxia, non-celiac 
gluten sensitivity, and the most well-known, celiac disease. Nowadays, the 
consumption of gluten-free products is not only restricted to targeted groups, 
but it has become a food trend for normal consumers, especially in countries 
such as the UK, the US, and some European countries, who believe that consuming 
a gluten-free product is a healthier choice compared to normal gluten-containing 
products. However, some research studies have disapproved of this claim because 
the currently available gluten-free products in the market are generally known 
to be lower in proteins, vitamins, and minerals and to contain higher lipids, 
sugar, and salt compared to their gluten-containing counterparts. The use of 
other gluten-free cereals such as sorghum, millet, and teff as well as pseudo 
cereals such as buckwheat and quinoa has gained significant interest in research 
in terms of their various potential health benefits. Hence, this review 
highlights the potential health benefits of some gluten-free cereals and pseudo 
cereals apart from corn and rice in the last decade. The potential health 
benefits of gluten-free products such as bread, pasta, crackers, and cookies and 
the health benefits of some other non-alcoholic beverages made from gluten-free 
cereals and pseudo cereals are reported.

DOI: 10.3390/foods10112523
PMCID: PMC8618534
PMID: 34828804

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that this manuscript was 
written in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


5. Middle East J Dig Dis. 2021 Oct;13(4):339-342. doi: 10.34172/mejdd.2021.244. 
Epub 2021 Jun 11.

Prevalence of IgE-Mediated Food Hypersensitivity to Cereals and Beans Based on 
Skin Prick Test in Children with Celiac Disease.

Jafari A(1), Kayvanloo S(1), Moazzen N(1), Motevalli Haghi N(1), Sedghi N(1), 
Khoshkhui M(2), Ahanchian H(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Development unit of Akbar Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, 
Mashhad University of medical sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(2)Allergy research center, Mashhad University of medical sciences, Mashhad, 
Iran.

BACKGROUND Celiac disease is a non-IgE mediated food allergy, which can cause 
extensive villus atrophy. Because of increased food allergen absorption, there 
are elevated IgA and IgG antibodies in these patients, so there is a concern 
about IgE antibody production against wheat and other cereals. METHODS In this 
study, we evaluated IgE-mediated hypersensitivity to wheat, rice, and other 
cereals in children with celiac disease. RESULTS 22 patients (50%) had at least 
one positive skin prick test to food allergens. The most frequent food allergen 
was peanut (31.8%), followed by wheat (18.2%), corn (9.1%), and rice (4.5%). The 
results revealed no significant correlation between age, sex, and the results of 
the skin prick test (p >0.05). The correlation between diagnosis time of celiac 
disease and results of skin prick test was also not significant statistically (p 
>0.05). CONCLUSION Because of the high prevalence of IgE mediated 
hypersensitivity to cereals and beans in children with celiac disease, a skin 
prick test might be considered in these patients, especially in refractory 
cases.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.34172/mejdd.2021.244
PMCID: PMC9489450
PMID: 36606013

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflict of interest related to this work


6. Nutrients. 2020 Jul 29;12(8):2277. doi: 10.3390/nu12082277.

Beneficial Effects of a Low-Nickel Diet on Relapsing IBS-Like and 
Extraintestinal Symptoms of Celiac Patients during a Proper Gluten-Free Diet: 
Nickel Allergic Contact Mucositis in Suspected Non-Responsive Celiac Disease.

Borghini R(1), De Amicis N(1), Bella A(2), Greco N(1), Donato G(1), Picarelli 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational and Precision Medicine, Sapienza University, 
00185 Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 00161 Rome, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Nickel (Ni)-rich foods can induce allergic contact mucositis 
(ACM) with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)-like symptoms in predisposed subjects. 
Ni ACM has a high prevalence (>30%) in the general population and can be 
diagnosed by a Ni oral mucosa patch test (omPT). Many celiac disease (CD) 
patients on a gluten-free diet (GFD) often show a recrudescence of 
gastrointestinal and extraintestinal symptoms, although serological and 
histological remission has been achieved. Since a GFD often results in higher 
loads of ingested alimentary Ni (e.g., corn), we hypothesized that it would lead 
to a consequent intestinal sensitization to Ni in predisposed subjects. We 
wanted to (1) study Ni ACM prevalence in still symptomatic CD patients on a GFD 
and (2) study the effects of a low-Ni diet (LNiD) on their recurrent symptoms.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We recruited 102 consecutive CD patients (74 female, 28 
male; age range 18-65 years, mean age 42.3 ± 7.4) on a GFD since at least 12 
months, in current serological and histological remission (Marsh-Oberhuber type 
0-I) who complained of relapsing gastrointestinal and/or extraintestinal 
symptoms.
INCLUSION CRITERIA: presence of at least three gastrointestinal symptoms with a 
score ≥5 on the modified Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale (GSRS) 
questionnaire.
EXCLUSION CRITERIA: IgE-mediated food allergy; history of past or current 
cancer; inflammatory bowel diseases; infectious diseases including Helicobacter 
pylori; lactose intolerance. All patients enrolled underwent Ni omPT and 
followed a LNiD for 3 months. A 24 symptoms questionnaire (GSRS modified 
according to the Salerno Experts' Criteria, with 15 gastrointestinal and 9 
extraintestinal symptoms) was administered at T0 (free diet), T1 (GFD, CD 
remission), T2 (recurrence of symptoms despite GFD), and T3 (GFD + LNiD) for 
comparisons. Comparisons were performed using Wilcoxon signed-rank test.
RESULTS: Twenty patients (all female, age range 23-65 years, mean age 39.1 ± 
2.9) out of 102 (19.6%) were finally included. All 20 patients enrolled (100%) 
showed positive Ni omPT, confirming an Ni ACM diagnosis. A correct GFD (T0 vs. 
T1) induced the improvement of 19 out of the total 24 (79.2%) symptoms, and 14 
out of 24 (58.3%) were statistically significant (p-value < 0.0083 according to 
Bonferroni correction). Prolonged GFD (T1 vs. T2) revealed the worsening of 20 
out of the total 24 (83.3%) symptoms, and 10 out of 24 (41.7%) were 
statistically significant. LNiD (T2 vs. T3) determined an improvement of 20 out 
of the total 24 (83.4%) symptoms, and in 10 out of 24 (41.7%) symptoms the 
improvement was statistically significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that the recrudescence of gastrointestinal and 
extraintestinal symptoms observed in CD subjects during GFD may be due to the 
increase in alimentary Ni intake, once gluten contamination and persisting 
villous atrophy are excluded. Ni overload can induce Ni ACM, which can be 
diagnosed by a specific Ni omPT. Improvement of symptoms occurs after a proper 
LNiD. These encouraging data should be confirmed with larger studies.

DOI: 10.3390/nu12082277
PMCID: PMC7468824
PMID: 32751300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


7. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr. 2021;61(1):14-24. doi: 10.1080/10408398.2020.1713724. 
Epub 2020 Jan 22.

Current applications of gluten-free grains - a review.

Woomer JS(1), Adedeji AA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosystems and Agricultural Engineering, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA.

The population of Americans suffering from celiac, gluten intolerance, and wheat 
allergy is 1 in every 14 people. Also, many are choosing gluten-free (GF) diets 
nowadays because of the perception that it is a healthier option for them. 
Therefore, in the last decade, the GF market in the US and all over the world 
has seen significant growth. Globally, GF product sales reached 4.63 billion USD 
in 2017, and are expected to reach 6.47 billion USD by 2023, a projected 
compound annual growth rate of 7.6%. Several grains like millet, corn, sorghum, 
and pseudocereals like amaranth, quinoa, and teff are the main ingredients for a 
gluten diet. Though most of them have a comparable nutrient profile as common 
grains, the main challenge to their acceptability is the quality departure from 
gluten-containing counterparts and imbalance nutrients that ensue when food 
processing aids like starch, gums, and enzymes are used. In this review, we 
profiled some of the common grains, their characteristics, functionality and the 
various food types they are used for. We also reviewed the impact of some of the 
current food processing aids like starch, hydrocolloids used for improving 
functionality, and processing techniques like extrusion suitable for making 
remarkable GF foods.

DOI: 10.1080/10408398.2020.1713724
PMID: 31965815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Food Prot. 2018 Oct;81(10):1723-1728. doi: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-18-184.

Evaluation of a Handheld Gluten Detection Device.

Taylor SL(1), Nordlee JA(1), Jayasena S(1), Baumert JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Food Allergy Research & Resource Program, Food Innovation Center, University 
of Nebraska-Lincoln, 1901 North 21st Street, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588-6207, USA.

A portable, handheld gluten detection device, the Nima sensor, is now available 
for consumers wishing to determine if gluten is present in food. By U.S. 
regulation, gluten-free foods should contain <20 ppm of gluten. Thirteen 
gluten-free foods (muffins, three different types of bread, three different 
types of pasta, puffed corn snack, ice cream, meatballs, vinegar and oil salad 
dressing, oatmeal, and dark chocolate) were prepared; each food was spiked on a 
weight to weight basis with gluten levels of 0, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, and 100 ppm 
before processing or preparation. Unprocessed and processed foods were tested 
with the handheld gluten sensor and by two gluten-specific enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) on the basis of the R5 and G12 monoclonal 
antibodies, respectively. The portable gluten detection device detected gluten 
in all food types at the 30-ppm addition level, failing to detect gluten in only 
5 (6.4%) of 78 subsamples. At the 20-ppm addition level, the portable gluten 
detection device failed to detect gluten in one type of pasta but detected 
gluten residues in 63 (87.5%) of 72 other subsamples. The device was able to 
detect gluten at the 10-ppm addition level in 9 of the 13 food matrices (41 of 
54 subsamples, 75.9%) but not in the three types of pasta and the puffed corn 
snack. The gluten-sensing device did not perform reliably at the 5-ppm addition 
level in 11 of 13 food matrices (exceptions: ice cream and muffins). In 
contrast, the ELISA methods were highly reliable at gluten addition levels of 
≥10 ppm in all food matrices. The portable gluten detection device yielded a low 
percentage of false-positive results (4 of 111, 3.6%) in these food matrices. 
Thus, this handheld portable gluten sensor performed reliably in the detection 
of gluten in foods having ≥20 ppm of added gluten with only 18 (5.9%) of 306 
failures, if results of the one type of pasta are excluded. The device worked 
with greater reliability as the gluten levels in the foods increased.

DOI: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-18-184
PMID: 30239212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2019 Jan;143(1):201-212.e4. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2018.02.041. Epub 2018 Mar 21.

Wheat amylase-trypsin inhibitors exacerbate intestinal and airway allergic 
immune responses in humanized mice.

Bellinghausen I(1), Weigmann B(2), Zevallos V(3), Maxeiner J(4), Reißig S(5), 
Waisman A(5), Schuppan D(3), Saloga J(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg 
University, Mainz, Germany; Research Center for Immunotherapy, University 
Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany. Electronic 
address: iris.bellinghausen@unimedizin-mainz.de.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine I, University Hospital Erlangen, University 
of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(3)Research Center for Immunotherapy, University Medical Center, Johannes 
Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany; Institute of Translational Immunology, 
University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(4)Asthma Core Facility, Research Center for Immunotherapy, University Medical 
Center, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.
(5)Research Center for Immunotherapy, University Medical Center, Johannes 
Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany; Institute for Molecular Medicine, 
University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.
(6)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg 
University, Mainz, Germany; Research Center for Immunotherapy, University 
Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Amylase-trypsin inhibitors (ATIs) in wheat and related cereals are 
potent activators of myeloid innate immune cells via engagement of TLR4. 
Furthermore, ATIs have been shown to serve as adjuvants in experimental 
intestinal inflammatory diseases.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to analyze whether ATIs are also modifiers 
of allergic inflammation.
METHODS: Therefore, CD4+ T cells from donors sensitized to grass or birch pollen 
were stimulated with autologous allergen-pulsed dendritic cells in the presence 
or absence of ATIs or the control storage protein zein from corn. To analyze 
allergen-induced gut and lung inflammation, immunodeficient mice were engrafted 
with PBMCs from these allergic donors plus the respective allergen, and fed with 
selected diets. Three weeks later, inflammation was induced by rectal or 
intranasal allergen challenge and monitored by mini endoscopy or airway 
hyperreactivity, respectively.
RESULTS: Allergen-specific T-cell proliferation and cytokine production was 
significantly exacerbated by ATIs and not by zein. In vivo, allergen-specific 
human IgE level was strongly elevated in sera of mice receiving an 
ATI-containing diet compared with mice that were fed gluten-free and thus 
ATI-free diet. Importantly, allergen-induced IgE-dependent colitis and airway 
hyperreactivity were also enhanced in ATI-fed mice. Gut inflammation was further 
increased in mice receiving an additional ATI injection and even detectable in 
the absence of the aeroallergen, whereas zein had no such effect. Injection of 
anti-human TLR4 mAbs or the anti-human IgE mAb omalizumab completely abolished 
ATI-induced allergic inflammation.
CONCLUSIONS: These results underline that wheat ATIs are important nutritional 
activators and adjuvants of allergy, which might be exploited for nutritional 
therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2018.02.041
PMID: 29574077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017 Mar;15(3):339-348. doi: 
10.1016/j.cgh.2016.08.007. Epub 2016 Aug 12.

Suspected Nonceliac Gluten Sensitivity Confirmed in Few Patients After Gluten 
Challenge in Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trials.

Molina-Infante J(1), Carroccio A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hospital Universitario San Pedro de 
Alcantara, Caceres, Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de 
Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBEREHD), Madrid, Spain. Electronic 
address: xavi_molina@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Palermo and Giovanni Paolo II 
Hospital, Sciacca (Azienda Sanitaria Provinciale di Agrigento), Italy.

Comment in
    JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2018 Sep;42(7):1211-1213. doi: 
10.1002/jpen.1429.

A double-blind, placebo-controlled, gluten challenge has been proposed to 
confirm a diagnosis of nonceliac gluten sensitivity (NCGS) in patients without 
celiac disease who respond to a gluten-free diet. To determine the accuracy of 
this approach, we analyzed data from 10 double-blind, placebo-controlled, 
gluten-challenge trials, comprising 1312 adults. The studies varied in the 
duration of the challenge (range, 1 d to 6 wk), daily doses for the gluten 
challenge (range, 2-52 g; 3 studies administered <8 g/d), and composition of the 
placebo (gluten-free products, xylose, whey protein, rice, or corn starch 
containing fermentable carbohydrates). Most of the studies found gluten 
challenge to significantly increase symptom scores compared with placebo. 
However, only 38 of 231 NCGS patients (16%) showed gluten-specific symptoms. 
Furthermore, 40% of these subjects had a nocebo response (similar or increased 
symptoms in response to placebo). These findings reveal heterogeneity and 
potential methodology flaws among studies of gluten challenge, cast doubt on 
gluten as the culprit food component in most patients with presumptive NCGS, and 
highlight the importance of the nocebo effect in these types of studies.

Copyright © 2017 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cgh.2016.08.007
PMID: 27523634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]