1. J Intern Med. 2022 Mar;291(3):283-302. doi: 10.1111/joim.13422. Epub 2021 Dec 
22.

Food allergy and hypersensitivity reactions in children and adults-A review.

Tedner SG(1)(2), Asarnoj A(1)(2), Thulin H(3)(4), Westman M(5)(6), Konradsen 
JR(1)(2), Nilsson C(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Pediatric Allergy and Pulmonology Unit at Astrid Lindgren Children's 
Hospital, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Allergy and Lung Department, Sachs' Children and Youth Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical Science and Education Södersjukhuset, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Division of Immunology and Allergy, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Asthma and Allergy Clinic S:t Göran, Stockholm, Sweden.

Adverse reactions after food intake are commonly reported and a cause of concern 
and anxiety that can lead to a very strict diet. The severity of the reaction 
can vary depending on the type of food and mechanism, and it is not always easy 
to disentangle different hypersensitivity diagnoses, which sometimes can exist 
simultaneously. After a carefully taken medical history, hypersensitivity to 
food can often be ruled out or suspected. The most common type of allergic 
reaction is immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated food allergy (prevalence 5-10%). 
Symptoms vary from mild itching, stomach pain, and rash to severe anaphylaxis. 
The definition of IgE-mediated food allergy is allergic symptoms combined with 
specific IgE-antibodies, and therefore only IgE-antibodies to suspected 
allergens should be analyzed. Nowadays, methods of molecular allergology can 
help with the diagnostic process. The most common allergens are milk and egg in 
infants, peanut and tree nuts in children, and fish and shellfish in adults. In 
young children, milk/egg allergy has a good chance to remit, making it important 
to follow up and reintroduce the food when possible. Other diseases triggered by 
food are non-IgE-mediated food allergy, for example, eosinophilic esophagitis, 
celiac disease, food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, and 
hypersensitivity to milk and biogenic amines. Some of the food 
hypersensitivities dominate in childhood, others are more common in adults. 
Interesting studies are ongoing regarding the possibilities of treating food 
hypersensitivity, such as through oral immunotherapy. The purpose of this review 
was to provide an overview of the most common types of food hypersensitivity 
reactions.

© 2021 The Association for the Publication of the Journal of Internal Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/joim.13422
PMID: 34875122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. BMJ. 2017 Aug 21;358:j3468. doi: 10.1136/bmj.j3468.

Medicines, excipients, and dietary intolerances.

Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.j3468
PMID: 28827390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Competing interests are in 
line with DTB’s policy on conflicts of interests.


3. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2014 Jun;46(3):225-40. doi:
10.1007/s12016-012-8339-6.

Clinical spectrum of food allergies: a comprehensive review.

Ho MH(1), Wong WH, Chang C.

Author information:
(1)The Division of Immunology, Rheumatology and Allergy, Department of 
Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Li Ka Shing Faculty of 
Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China, marcoho@hku.hk.

Food allergy is defined as an adverse immune response towards food proteins or 
as a form of a food intolerance associated with a hypersensitive immune 
response. It should also be reproducible by a double-blind placebo-controlled 
food challenge. Many reported that food reactions are not allergic but are 
intolerances. Food allergy often presents to clinicians as a symptom complex. 
This review focuses on the clinical spectrum and manifestations of various forms 
of food allergies. According to clinical presentations and allergy testing, 
there are three types of food allergy: IgE mediated, mixed (IgE/Non-IgE), and 
non-IgE mediated (cellular, delayed type hypersensitivity). Recent advances in 
food allergy in early childhood have highlighted increasing recognition of a 
spectrum of delayed-onset non-IgE-mediated manifestation of food allergy. Common 
presentations of food allergy in infancy including atopic eczema, infantile 
colic, and gastroesophageal reflux. These clinical observations are frequently 
associated with food hypersensitivity and respond to dietary elimination. 
Non-IgE-mediated food allergy includes a wide range of diseases, from atopic 
dermatitis to food protein-induced enterocolitis and from eosinophilic 
esophagitis to celiac disease. The most common food allergies in children 
include milk, egg, soy, wheat, peanut, treenut, fish, and shellfish. Milk and 
egg allergies are usually outgrown, but peanut and treenut allergy tends to 
persist. The prevalence of food allergy in infancy is increasing and may affect 
up to 15-20 % of infants. The alarming rate of increase calls for a public 
health approach in the prevention and treatment of food allergy in children.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-012-8339-6
PMID: 23229594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2011 Oct;13(5):426-34. doi: 10.1007/s11894-011-0215-7.

Differentiating food allergies from food intolerances.

Guandalini S(1), Newland C.

Author information:
(1)Section of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Celiac Disease Center, University of 
Chicago, 5839 S. Maryland Ave, MC 4065, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. 
sguandalini@peds.bsd.uchicago.edu

Adverse reactions to foods are extremely common, and generally they are 
attributed to allergy. However, clinical manifestations of various degrees of 
severity related to ingestion of foods can arise as a result of a number of 
disorders, only some of which can be defined as allergic, implying an immune 
mechanism. Recent epidemiological data in North America showed that the 
prevalence of food allergy in children has increased. The most common food 
allergens in the United States include egg, milk, peanut, tree nuts, wheat, 
crustacean shellfish, and soy. This review examines the various forms of food 
intolerances (immunoglobulin E [IgE] and non-IgE mediated), including celiac 
disease and gluten sensitivity. Immune mediated reactions can be either IgE 
mediated or non-IgE mediated. Among the first group, Immediate GI 
hypersensitivity and oral allergy syndrome are the best described. Often, but 
not always, IgE-mediated food allergies are entities such as eosinophilic 
esophagitis and eosinophilic gastroenteropathy. Non IgE-mediated immune mediated 
food reactions include celiac disease and gluten sensitivity, two increasingly 
recognized disorders. Finally, non-immune mediated reactions encompass different 
categories such as disorders of digestion and absorption, inborn errors of 
metabolism, as well as pharmacological and toxic reactions.

DOI: 10.1007/s11894-011-0215-7
PMID: 21792544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Biotechnol Adv. 2005 Sep;23(6):409-14. doi: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2005.05.006.

Food allergy and its relevance to industrial food proteins.

Mills EN(1), Breiteneder H.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Food Research, Norwich Research Park, Colney, Norwich, NR4 7UA, 
UK. Clare.mills@bbsrc.ac.uk

Food allergies can be defined as IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reactions and are 
quite distinct from food intolerances, such as Coeliac disease, with symptoms 
usually appearing within a matter of minutes of exposure. Around 1-2% of adults 
and up to 5-7% of children suffer from some type of food allergy with foods such 
as peanuts, tree nuts, wheat and soy, cow's milk, egg, fish and shellfish being 
responsible for the majority of reactions. The macromolecules recognised by IgE 
(generally proteinaceous in nature) are termed allergens. A brief description of 
the allergenic components present in the major allergenic foods is given 
followed by a short discussion regarding their importance in industrial proteins 
in the light of recent food labelling legislation for allergens.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2005.05.006
PMID: 16002252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Clin Rev Allergy. 1985 Jul;3(3):331-49. doi: 10.1007/BF02992999.

Food allergens.

Metcalfe DD.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02992999
PMID: 3893676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]