1. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2025 May 19:S1542-3565(25)00318-0. doi: 
10.1016/j.cgh.2025.02.015. Online ahead of print.

Clinical Practice Updates: AGA Clinical Practice Update on GI Manifestations and 
Autonomic or Immune Dysfunction in Hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: Expert 
Review.

Aziz Q(1), Harris LA(2), Goodman BP(3), Simrén M(4), Shin A(5).

Author information:
(1)Blizard Institute, Wingate Institute of Neurogastroenterology, Centre for 
Neuroscience, Surgery and Trauma, Barts and the London School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Queen Mary University, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, 
Arizona. Electronic address: harris.lucinda@mayo.edu.
(3)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona.
(4)Department of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, Institute of Medicine, 
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)Vatche and Tamar Manoukian Division of Digestive Diseases, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.

DESCRIPTION: The purpose of this Clinical Practice Update Expert Review is to 
describe key principles in the evaluation and management of patients with 
disorders of gut-brain interaction (DGBI) and hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 
(hEDS) or hypermobility spectrum disorders (HSDs) with coexisting postural 
orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) and/or mast cell activation syndrome 
(MCAS).
METHODS: This expert review/commentary was commissioned and approved by the 
American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) Institute Clinical Practice 
Updates Committee and the AGA Governing Board to provide timely guidance on a 
topic of high clinical importance to the AGA membership, and underwent internal 
peer review by the Clinical Practice Updates Committee and external peer review 
through standard procedures of Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology. These 
Best Practice Advice statements were drawn from a review of the published 
literature and from expert opinion. Because systematic reviews were not 
performed, these Best Practice Advice statements do not carry formal ratings 
regarding the quality of evidence or strength of the presented considerations. 
BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 1: Clinicians should be aware of the observed associations 
between hEDS or HSDs and POTS and/or MCAS and their overlapping gastrointestinal 
(GI) manifestations; while theoretical explanations exist, experimental evidence 
of the biological mechanisms that explain relationships is limited and evolving. 
BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 2: Testing for POTS/MCAS should be targeted to patients 
presenting with clinical manifestations of POTS/MCAS, but universal testing for 
POTS/MCAS in all patients with hEDS/HSDs is not supported by the current 
evidence. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 3: Gastroenterologists seeing patients with DGBI 
should inquire about joint hypermobility and strongly consider incorporating the 
Beighton score for assessing joint hypermobility into their practice as a 
screening tool; if the screen is positive, gastroenterologists may consider 
applying 2017 diagnostic criteria to diagnose hEDS 
(https://www.ehlers-danlos.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/hEDS-Dx-Criteria-checklist-1.pdf) 
or offer appropriate referral to a specialist where resources are available. 
BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 4: Testing for POTS through postural vital signs (eg, 
symptomatic increase in heart rate of 30 beats/min or more with 10 minutes of 
standing during an active stand or head-up tilt table test in the absence of 
orthostasis) and referral to specialty practices (eg, cardiology or neurology) 
for autonomic testing should be considered in patients with hEDS/HSDs and 
refractory GI symptoms who also report orthostatic intolerance after exclusion 
of medication side effects and appropriate lifestyle or behavioral modifications 
(eg, adequate hydration and physical exercise) have been attempted but is not 
required for all patients with hEDS/HSDs who report GI symptoms alone. BEST 
PRACTICE ADVICE 5: In patients presenting to gastroenterology providers, testing 
for mast cell disorders including MCAS should be considered in patients with 
hEDS/HSDs and DGBI who also present with episodic symptoms that suggest a more 
generalized mast cell disorder (eg, visceral and somatic pain, pruritus, 
flushing, sweating, urticaria, angioedema, wheezing, tachycardia, abdominal 
cramping, vomiting, nausea, diarrhea, urogynecological and neurological 
complaints) involving 2 or more physiological systems (eg, cutaneous, GI, 
cardiac, respiratory, and neuropsychiatric), but current data do not support the 
use of these tests for routine evaluation of GI symptoms in all patients with 
hEDS/HSDs without clinical or laboratory evidence of a primary or secondary mast 
cell disorder. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 6: If MCAS is suspected, diagnostic testing 
with serum tryptase levels collected at baseline and 1-4 hours following symptom 
flares may be considered by the gastroenterologist; increases of 20% above 
baseline plus 2 ng/mL are necessary to demonstrate evidence of mast cell 
activation. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 7: If a diagnosis of MCAS is supported through 
clinical and/or laboratory features, patients should be referred to an allergy 
specialist or mast cell disease research center where additional testing (eg, 
urinary N-methylhistamine, leukotriene E4, 11β-prostaglandin F2) may be 
performed. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 8: Diagnostic evaluation of GI symptoms 
consistent with DGBI in patients with hEDS/HSDs and comorbid POTS and/or MCAS 
should follow a similar approach to the evaluation of DGBI as in the general 
population including the use of a positive symptom-based diagnostic strategy and 
limited noninvasive testing. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 9: Testing for celiac disease 
may be considered earlier in the diagnostic evaluation of patients with 
hEDS/HSDs who report a variety of GI symptoms and not only limited to those with 
diarrhea. There is insufficient research to support routine testing for 
disaccharidase deficiencies or other diet-mediated mechanisms as causes of GI 
symptoms in hEDS/HSDs. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 10: Diagnostic testing for 
functional defecation disorders with anorectal manometry, balloon expulsion 
test, or defecography should be considered in patients with hEDS/HSDs and lower 
GI symptoms such as incomplete evacuation given the high prevalence of pelvic 
floor dysfunction, especially rectal hyposensitivity, in this population. BEST 
PRACTICE ADVICE 11: In patients with hEDS/HSDs and comorbid POTS who report 
chronic upper GI symptoms, timely diagnostic testing of gastric motor functions 
(eg, measurement of gastric emptying and/or accommodation) should be considered 
after appropriate exclusion of anatomical and structural diseases, as abnormal 
gastric emptying may be more common than in the general population. BEST 
PRACTICE ADVICE 12: Medical management of GI symptoms in hEDS/HSDs and POTS/MCAS 
should focus on treating the most prominent GI symptoms and abnormal GI function 
test results. In addition to general DGBIs and GI motility disorder treatment, 
management should also include treating any symptoms attributable to POTS and/or 
MCAS. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 13: Treatment of POTS may include increasing fluid 
and salt intake, exercise training, and use of compression garments. Special 
pharmacological treatments for volume expansion, heart rate control, and 
vasoconstriction with integrated care from multiple specialties (eg, cardiology, 
neurology) should be considered in patients who do not respond to conservative 
lifestyle measures. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 14: When MCAS is suspected, patients 
can benefit from treatment with histamine receptor antagonists and/or mast cell 
stabilizers, in addition to avoiding triggers such as certain foods, alcohol, 
strong smells, temperature changes, mechanical stimuli (eg, friction), emotional 
distress (eg, pollen, mold), or specific medications (eg, opioids, nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory agents, iodinated contrast). BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 15: Besides 
general nutritional support, special diets including a gastroparesis diet (ie, 
small particle diet) and various elimination diets (eg, low fermentable 
carbohydrates, gluten- or dairy-free, low-histamine diets) can be considered for 
improving GI symptoms. Dietary interventions should be delivered with 
appropriate nutritional counseling or guidance to avoid the pitfalls of 
restrictive eating. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 16: Management of chronic GI symptoms 
in patients with hEDS/HSDs who do not exhibit symptoms consistent with POTS or 
MCAS should align with existing approaches to management of DGBI and GI motility 
disorders in the general population, including integrated multidisciplinary care 
involving multiple specialties, where appropriate (eg, cardiology, rheumatology, 
dietician, psychology).

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cgh.2025.02.015
PMID: 40387691


2. J Food Prot. 2025 May 12;88(7):100533. doi: 10.1016/j.jfp.2025.100533. Online 
ahead of print.

Food Allergy Labeling and Disclosure Practices on Restaurants' Online Menus in 
Toronto, Canada.

Nahle R(1), Thaivalappil A(2), Young I(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Occupational and Public Health, Toronto Metropolitan University, 
350 Victoria St, Toronto, Ontario M5B 2K3, Canada. Electronic address: 
rawan.nahle@torontomu.ca.
(2)School of Occupational and Public Health, Toronto Metropolitan University, 
350 Victoria St, Toronto, Ontario M5B 2K3, Canada.

Restaurants have a responsibility to mitigate food-allergic reactions by 
nonverbally disclosing allergens on their menus and websites. In Canada, there 
are no laws requiring allergen labeling on non-pre-packaged food, leaving it up 
to restaurant managers to decide how to accommodate allergic customers. A 
cross-sectional study was conducted to assess allergen disclosure and labeling 
on online menus in Toronto, Canada. A random sample of 1,000 nonchain 
restaurants was sourced from DineSafe, Toronto's food inspection system. The 
online menus of each restaurant were accessed and assessed using a checklist in 
2023-2024 to determine the presence of allergen menus, statements, or symbols. 
Mixed-effect logistic regression models were developed to assess the 
relationship between restaurant characteristics (cuisine type, Google review 
rating, cost indicator, and number of locations) and two outcomes: (1) presence 
of at least one allergen symbol on the menu, and (2) presence of an allergen 
statement on the menu. Only 16% (n = 159) of restaurants included allergen 
statements, and only 10% (n = 100) used allergen symbols. Regression models 
predicted that vegan and vegetarian restaurants were the most likely cuisine 
type to have at least one allergen symbol on their menu (19%, 95% CI: 13-24%), 
and Southeast Asian restaurants were the most likely to have an allergen 
statement (28%, 95% CI: 20-36%). Additionally, higher restaurant costs and 
multiple locations were linked to more allergen disclosures. This study 
highlights the need for improved allergen labeling in nonchain restaurants. 
Policies requiring allergen disclosures can improve menu transparency and 
encourage proactive customer-waiter interactions, preventing allergic reactions 
in restaurants.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jfp.2025.100533
PMID: 40368007

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


3. Am J Gastroenterol. 2025 May 14. doi: 10.14309/ajg.0000000000003537. Online 
ahead of print.

Hereditary Alpha-Tryptasemia is Associated with Ongoing Symptoms in Individuals 
with Celiac Disease Despite Following a Gluten-Free Diet.

Therrien A(1), Akula S(1), Galeas-Pena M(2), Frank E(1), Gillette L(3), 
Silvester JA(1)(3), Leffler DA(1), Galvez JV(1), Kelly CP(1), Pozdnyakova 
O(4)(5), Glover S(2)(6), Lyons JJ(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Celiac Center, Department of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA USA.
(2)Department of Medicine. Section of, Gastroenterology, Tulane University, LA, 
USA.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Boston Children 
Hospital, Boston, MA USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Brigham's and Women Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Mississippi, Jackson, MS, USA.
(7)Division of Allergy & Immunology, Department of Medicine, University of 
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(8)Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(9)Translational Allergic Immunopathology Unit, NIAID, Bethesda, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hereditary alpha-tryptasemia (HαT) is caused by increased copy 
number of TPSAB1 when encoding for alpha-tryptase, resulting in elevated basal 
serum tryptase (BST). Many affected individuals report irritable bowel 
syndrome-like and reflux symptoms. We aimed to assess the prevalence of HαT in 
celiac disease (CeD) and whether this genetic trait modifies disease course. 
Methods: Prospective cohort of subjects with CeD or non-celiac gluten 
sensitivity (NCGS) either at diagnosis (Dx), with persisting symptoms on a 
gluten-free diet (GFD), or in clinical remission. BST levels were determined by 
immunoassay and tryptase genotyping was performed on gDNA using ddPCR. Duodenal 
and gastric biopsies were stained for c-KIT, and mast cell (MC) counts were 
averaged over 5 hpf.
RESULTS: There were 153 eligible subjects; 13 NCGS and 140 CeD (8 newly Dx 
patients, 66 with persisting symptoms, 66 in remission). HαT was found in 9 
subjects, all symptomatic with CeD (6.4%). One was newly Dx, and the others had 
persisting symptoms (12.3% of subgroup). Excluding HαT, BST levels were higher 
among CeD vs NCGS (median 5.4 vs 3.9 mcg/L p<0.05). Duodenal MC counts were 
higher in CeD vs controls (p<0.05), and 24% higher in those with HαT (median HαT 
CeD 27.3/hpf, non-HαT CeD 22.0 /hpf, controls 18.4/hpf). MC counts did not 
differ based on villous atrophy or clinical presentation.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of HαT in CeD is similar to the general population, 
however, all participants with CeD and HαT had ongoing GI symptoms. Evaluation 
for HαT should be considered in the management of CeD patients with persisting 
symptoms.

Copyright © 2025 by The American College of Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.14309/ajg.0000000000003537
PMID: 40367491


4. Semin Immunol. 2025 Apr 23;78:101960. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2025.101960. Online 
ahead of print.

Immune therapies in coeliac disease and food allergies: Advances, challenges, 
and opportunities.

Campbell DE(1), Mehr S(2), Moscatelli OG(3), Anderson RP(4), Tye-Din JA(5).

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; 
University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; National Allergy 
Centre of Excellence, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, Victora, 
Australia.
(2)Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Immunology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(4)Gastroenterology Service, Mackay Base Hospital, West Mackay, Queensland, 
Australia.
(5)Immunology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia; Department of Gastroenterology, the Royal Melbourne Hospital, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia; The Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia. Electronic address: tyedin@wehi.edu.au.

Coeliac disease and food allergy management primarily relies on the strict 
avoidance of dietary antigens. This approach is challenging to maintain in 
real-world settings and in food allergy carries the risk of life-threatening 
anaphylaxis. Despite their distinct pathogenesis, both disorders are driven by 
maladaptive responses to dietary proteins, creating opportunities for shared 
treatment strategies. In food allergy, desensitisation therapies such as oral, 
sublingual, and epicutaneous immunotherapy are well-established, complemented by 
biologics like omalizumab and dupilumab. However, the induction of sustained 
tolerance remains challenging. In contrast, therapeutic advancements for coeliac 
disease are still in their early stages. Current efforts focus on gluten 
detoxification or modification, immune blockade or modulation, tolerogenic 
approaches, and barrier restoration. Emerging therapies, including JAK and BTK 
inhibitors and microbiome-targeted interventions, support further targeted 
treatment options for both conditions. Biomarkers tracking gluten-specific T 
cells have emerged as valuable tools for immunomonitoring and symptom assessment 
in coeliac disease, although standardisation of patient-reported outcome 
measures and gluten challenge protocols is still needed. Food allergy trials are 
reliant on double-blind placebo-controlled food challenges to measure allergen 
reactivity, but these are time-consuming, carry risks, and underscore the need 
for surrogate biomarkers. The successful development of immune-targeted 
therapies will require building an immune toolset to optimally assess systemic 
responses to antigens in both conditions. Clinically, this could lead to better 
outcomes for patients who might otherwise remain undiagnosed or untreated due to 
the absence of significant enteropathy or allergen-specific symptoms.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.smim.2025.101960
PMID: 40273881

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest SM and OM 
declare no competing interests. DEC: reports personal fees from DBV Technologies 
and Westmead Fertility Centre and grants from National Health and Medical 
Research Council of Australia and FARE (Food Allergy Research & Education) US. 
RA: is an advisor to Takeda Pharmaceutical, AMYRA Biotech, DBV Technologies, 
Barinthus Biotherapeutics, EVOQ Therapeutics, Immunic, Pecigen ActoBio, Allero 
Therapeutics, Kanyos Bio, GSK, TregTherapeutics, Bioniz Therapeutics, AdAlta, 
Universal Cells, Bristol-Myers Squibb Australia; is a director and shareholder 
of Novoviah Pharmaceuticals; and is inventor of patents relating to diagnosis 
and treatment of coeliac disease. JT-D: consultant or advisory board member for 
Anatara, Anokion, Barinthus Biotherapeutics, Chugai Pharmaceuticals, DBV 
Technologies, Dr Falk, Forte Biosciences, IM Therapeutics, Janssen, Kallyope, 
Mozart Therapeutics, Takeda, TEVA and Topas, and has received research funding 
from Barinthus Biotherapeutics, Chugai Pharmaceuticals, Codexis, DBV 
Technologies, Kallyope, Novoviah Pharmaceuticals, Topas and Tillotts 
Pharmaceuticals. He is an inventor on patents relating to the use of gluten 
peptides in coeliac disease diagnosis and treatment.


5. J Proteome Res. 2025 May 2;24(5):2336-2348. doi:
10.1021/acs.jproteome.3c00456.  Epub 2025 Apr 15.

Proteomic Profiling of Celiac-Toxic Motifs and Allergens in Cereals Containing 
Gluten.

Daly ME(1), Huang X(2), Nitride C(3), Hughes C(4), Tanskanen J(5), Shewry PR(6), 
Gethings LA(1)(4)(7), Mills ENC(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, School of Biological Sciences, 
Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, The University of Manchester, 
Princess Street, Manchester M1 7DN, U.K.
(2)Department of Food and Nutrition, University of Helsinki, Agnes Sjöberginkatu 
2, PL 66, Helsinki FI-00014, Finland.
(3)Department of Agricultural Sciences, University of Naples Federico II, 
Portici 80055, Italy.
(4)Waters Corporation, Stamford Avenue, Wilmslow SK9 4AX, U.K.
(5)Natural Resources Institute (LUKE), Viikinkaari 1, Helsinki 00710, Finland.
(6)Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, Herts AL5 2JQ, U.K.
(7)School of School of Biosciences and Medicine, The University of Surrey, 
Guildford GU2 7XH, U.K.

Cereal-based foods can cause immune-mediated adverse reactions, including celiac 
disease and IgE-mediated allergies, but the potency of different cereal species 
to cause such reactions appears to vary, with oats being less celiac-toxic and 
allergenic than wheat. In order to define differences in the immunological 
potential of wheat, barley, rye, and oats, proteomic profiling of proteins 
carrying celiac-toxic motifs and allergens has been undertaken. Total protein 
extracts were subjected to chymotryptic digestion and analyzed using 
data-independent ion mobility mass spectrometry and a pipeline employing a 
curated gluten protein sequence database. Depending on the cereal species, 
376-2769 proteins were identified, the majority being grain storage proteins. 
Relative quantitation of proteins containing celiac-toxic motifs showed that 
they were most abundant and diverse in wheat, with only a limited number, at 
much lower abundance, identified in oats. Allergens belonging to the seed 
storage prolamins were the most abundant, while allergens belonging to the 
α-amylase/trypsin inhibitor family associated with respiratory allergy were of 
only moderate abundance in comparison. Wheat allergen homologues were identified 
in other cereal species but at a very low level in oats. These data suggest that 
the relative risk of oats in the context of both celiac disease and IgE-mediated 
allergy is low.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.3c00456
PMCID: PMC12053943
PMID: 40234187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following competing 
financial interest(s): MD and LG are employees of Waters Corporation, a 
manufacturer of chromatographic and mass spectrometry equipment. MD completed 
this work prior to being employed by Waters Corporation, whilst studying for a 
PhD degree at the University of Manchester.


6. Sci Rep. 2025 Mar 31;15(1):10976. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-95525-6.

Presence of gluten and soy derived excipients in medicinal products and their 
implications on allergen safety and labeling.

Figueiredo A(1), Auxtero MD(2), Brás A(3), Casimiro A(3), Costa IM(2).

Author information:
(1)Egas Moniz Center for Interdisciplinary Research (CiiEM), Egas Moniz School 
of Health & Science, Caparica, 2829-511, Almada, Portugal. 
afigueiredo@egasmoniz.edu.pt.
(2)Egas Moniz Center for Interdisciplinary Research (CiiEM), Egas Moniz School 
of Health & Science, Caparica, 2829-511, Almada, Portugal.
(3)Egas Moniz School of Health & Science, Caparica, 2829-511, Almada, Portugal.

Gluten and soy allergies are significant health concerns, particularly in 
individuals with celiac disease or soy sensitivity. While dietary sources of 
these allergens are well-studied, their presence in medicinal products remains 
under-explored. This study assessed the prevalence of gluten and soy-derived 
excipients in 308 medicinal products authorized for marketing in Portugal. A 
systematic search of the Summary of Product Characteristics (SmPC) database was 
conducted for 108 analgesics and antipyretics containing paracetamol, 85 NSAIDs 
containing ibuprofen, and 115 antiasthmatic and bronchodilator medicinal 
products. The study found significant associations between pharmacotherapeutic 
groups and the presence of these allergens (p < 0.001). Gluten was more 
prevalent in the group of analgesics and antipyretics (44.4%) than in NSAIDs 
(8.2%), whereas soy-derived excipients were more frequent in NSAIDs (14%) than 
in analgesics and antipyretics (6.5%). No excipients containing gluten or soy 
were identified in antiasthmatic and bronchodilator medicinal products. In 
analgesics and antipyretics, 51.2% of solid oral dosage forms and 40% of liquid 
oral formulations contained gluten. Within the NSAIDs group, gluten was mainly 
present in liquid oral dosage forms (26.7%). Soy-derived excipients were found 
in 30% of liquid oral formulations and in 33.3% of rectal dosage forms of 
analgesics and antipyretics. In the NSAIDs group, soy was more prevalent in 
liquid oral formulations (26.7%). These findings highlight the need for clearer 
labeling of allergens in medicinal products and underscore the importance of 
vigilance for patients with gluten or soy allergies. Further research is 
required to address gaps in allergen disclosure by pharmaceutical manufacturers 
and to promote safer medicinal product use for sensitive populations. Enhanced 
awareness among healthcare providers and patients is essential to mitigate the 
risk of allergic reactions associated with hidden excipients in medicinal 
products.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-025-95525-6
PMCID: PMC11958770
PMID: 40164820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests.


7. BMC Gastroenterol. 2025 Mar 25;25(1):199. doi: 10.1186/s12876-025-03799-x.

Prevalence and characteristics of adults avoiding gluten without celiac disease: 
a long-term population-based follow-up study.

Tiainen M(1), Kurppa K(1)(2)(3), Jääskeläinen T(4), Kaartinen N(4), Huhtala 
H(5), Kaukinen K(1)(6), Taavela J(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Celiac Disease Research Center, Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, 
Tampere University and Tampere University Hospital, Elämänaukio 2, Tampere, 
Finland.
(2)Tampere Center for Child, Adolescent, and Maternal Health Research, 
Department of Pediatrics, Tampere University, Tampere University Hospital, 
Tampere, Finland.
(3)University Consortium of Seinäjoki, Seinäjoki, Finland.
(4)Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Faculty of Social Sciences, Tampere University, Tampere, Finland.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, 
Finland.
(7)Celiac Disease Research Center, Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, 
Tampere University and Tampere University Hospital, Elämänaukio 2, Tampere, 
Finland. juha.taavela@tuni.fi.
(8)Department of Gastroenterology, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, 
Finland. juha.taavela@tuni.fi.

OBJECTIVE: Nationwide prevalence studies on people avoiding gluten without 
celiac disease (PWAG) are lacking, and in particular, long-term follow-up 
studies are unavailable. We aimed to evaluate the prevalence, incidence, and 
characteristics of PWAG in a population-based cohort in 2000 and 2011.
METHODS: Health and diet-related data were collected in nationwide Health 2000 
and 2011 surveys, which comprised 5,777 and 3,866 individuals, respectively, 
representing 2,682,733 and 1,967,876 Finnish adults. Serum samples were taken 
for the measurement of transglutaminase autoantibodies. In total 3,296 
individuals participated in both surveys, forming a prospective cohort. PWAG 
refers to subjects avoiding gluten without celiac disease or positive 
autoantibodies. Psychological health was assessed with General Health 
Questionnaire and the Beck Depression Inventory.
RESULTS: The prevalence of PWAG increased significantly from 0.2% (2000) to 0.7% 
(2011) (p < 0.001), with the highest prevalence (1.3%) detected in 
individuals > 70 years old. An annual incidence rate of 42 (95% confidence 
interval 25-71) per 100,000 persons was noted. The PWAG group was more likely to 
maintain additional special diets than those not avoiding gluten, including e.g. 
lactose-free diet (41.7% vs. 12.0% in 2011, p < 0.001) and food restriction for 
allergy (12.5% vs. 3.0%, p = 0.007). Beck Depression Inventory indicated more 
depression (p = 0.023) among PWAG in 2000, while no difference was seen in 2011 
or in General Health Questionnaire. Celiac disease-related risk factors, 
including female gender, anemia, autoimmune diseases or antibody levels near the 
upper limit of normal in 2000, did not predict later gluten avoidance.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of PWAG multiplied over a decade, reaching 0.7% in 
2011 in Finland. The PWAG group maintained more likely additional dietary 
restrictions than those not avoiding gluten and had signs of psychosocial 
burden. No predicting factors for the condition were identified.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12876-025-03799-x
PMCID: PMC11938570
PMID: 40133823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: All procedures performed in this study were in accordance with the 
1964 Helsinki Declaration and its later amendments. The Health 2000 survey was 
approved by the Ethics Committee for Research in Epidemiology and Public Health 
in May 2000, while the Health 2011 survey received approval from the 
Coordinating Ethics Committee in March 2011, which were part of the Hospital 
District of Helsinki and Uusimaa at that time. Written informed consent was 
obtained from all participants. All study data were analyzed anonymized without 
personal information by which the participants could be identified. Consent for 
publication: Not applicable. Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.


8. Sci Transl Med. 2025 Mar 19;17(790):eadr8941. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.adr8941.  Epub 2025 Mar 19.

T cell receptor precision editing of regulatory T cells for celiac disease.

Porret R(1), Alcaraz-Serna A(1), Peter B(2), Bernier-Latmani J(3), Cecchin R(1), 
Alfageme-Abello O(1), Ermellino L(1), Hafezi M(3), Pace E(1), du Pré MF(4), Lana 
E(1), Golshayan D(5), Velin D(6), Eyquem J(7), Tang Q(8), Petrova TV(3), Coukos 
G(3)(9), Irving M(3)(9), Pot C(2), Pantaleo G(1), Sollid LM(4), Muller 
YD(1)(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Immunology and Allergy, Lausanne University Hospital and 
University of Lausanne, Lausanne CH-1005, Switzerland.
(2)Laboratories of Neuroimmunology, Service of Neurology and Neuroscience 
Research Center, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Lausanne University 
Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne CH-1005, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Oncology, Lausanne University Hospital and University of 
Lausanne, 1005 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)Norwegian Coeliac Disease Research Centre, Institute of Clinical Medicine, 
University of Oslo and Department of Immunology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo 
NO-0424, Norway.
(5)Transplantation Center, Department of Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital 
and University of Lausanne, Lausanne CH-1005, Switzerland.
(6)Service of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Lausanne University Hospital and 
University of Lausanne, Lausanne CH-1005, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(8)Diabetes Center, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 
94143, USA.
(9)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Branch, 1066 Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(10)Centre for Human Immunology Lausanne, Lausanne CH-1005, Switzerland.

Celiac disease, a gluten-sensitive enteropathy, demonstrates a strong human 
leukocyte antigen (HLA) association, with more than 90% of patients carrying the 
HLA-DQ2.5 allotype. No therapy is available for the condition except for a 
lifelong gluten-free diet. To address this gap, we explored the therapeutic 
potential of regulatory T cells (Tregs). By orthotopic replacement of T cell 
receptors (TCRs) through homology-directed repair, we generated gluten-reactive 
HLA-DQ2.5-restricted CD4+ engineered (e) T effector cells (Teffs) and eTregs and 
performed in vivo experiments in HLA-DQ2.5 transgenic mice. Of five validated 
TCRs, TCRs specific for two immunodominant and deamidated gluten epitopes 
(DQ2.5-glia-α1a and DQ2.5-glia-α2) were selected for further evaluation. CD4+ 
eTeffs exposed to deamidated gluten through oral gavage colocalized with 
dendritic and B cells in the Peyer's patches and gut-draining lymph nodes and 
specifically migrated to the intestine. The suppressive function of human eTregs 
correlated with high TCR functional activity. eTregs specific for one epitope 
suppressed the proliferation and gut migration of CD4+ eTeffs specific for the 
same and the other gluten epitope, demonstrating bystander suppression. The 
suppression requires an antigen-specific activation of eTregs given that 
polyclonal Tregs failed to suppress CD4+ eTeffs. These findings highlight the 
potential of gluten-reactive eTregs as a therapeutic for celiac disease.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.adr8941
PMID: 40106579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2025 Mar;36(3):e70061. doi: 10.1111/pai.70061.

Gluten-free diet management and well-being in children with celiac disease: A 
qualitative study.

Maddison-Roberts H(1)(2), Jones C(1), Satherley RM(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Department of Psychological Interventions, Faculty of 
Health and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK.
(2)South West London and St George's Mental Health NHS Trust, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Management of celiac disease (CD) requires adherence to a strict 
gluten-free diet (GFD). However, little is known about how children with CD 
manage the GFD. This qualitative study sought to gain a comprehensive 
understanding of how children with CD experience and navigate the GFD, focusing 
on their dietary preferences, perceptions, and challenges, as well as the impact 
of these experiences.
METHODS: Fifteen children with CD, aged 8-13 years, who had been following the 
GFD for a minimum of one year, were interviewed with their parents about their 
management of the GFD. Reflexive thematic analysis was used to analyze the data.
RESULTS: Children described a range of strategies for managing the GFD. While 
some adopt problem-focused strategies such as planning ahead and carrying 
gluten-free foods on their person, others exhibit heightened anxiety and 
persistent doubts, indicating the need for tailored healthcare support. 
Importantly, the study uncovers socioecological influences, including social 
roles, communication patterns, and environmental factors, which shape children's 
beliefs and coping strategies.
CONCLUSIONS: The study underscores the importance of monitoring gluten-related 
distress, beliefs, and behaviors in children with CD, as well as the broader 
context of children's lives. To better support children with CD, holistic 
support may target anxiety to support well-being alongside GFD management.

© 2025 The Author(s). Pediatric Allergy and Immunology published by European 
Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pai.70061
PMCID: PMC11916637
PMID: 40099805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest 
related to this study.


10. Food Funct. 2025 Mar 17;16(6):2461-2473. doi: 10.1039/d4fo05757k.

Dietary methionine restriction restores wheat gluten-induced celiac-associated 
small intestine damage in association with affecting butyric acid production by 
intestinal flora.

Yu T(1)(2)(3)(4), Gao J(3)(4), Yuan J(1)(5)(4), Yin Z(1)(2)(3)(4), Chen 
X(1)(2)(3)(4), Wu Y(1)(2)(3)(4), Dai R(1)(2)(3)(4), Yan D(1)(2)(3)(4), Chen 
H(1)(2)(4), Wu Y(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Resources, Nanchang University, 
Nanchang 330047, Jiangxi, China. ericyo918@hotmail.com.
(2)Sino-German Joint Research Institute, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330047, 
Jiangxi, China.
(3)School of Food Science and Technology, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, 
Jiangxi, China.
(4)Jiangxi Province Key Laboratory of Food Allergy, Nanchang University, 
Nanchang, 330047, Jiangxi, China.
(5)School of Pharmaceutical Science, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330006, 
Jiangxi, China.

Methionine restriction has received some attention in recent years as a novel 
mode of dietary intervention. Our previous study found that methionine 
restriction could inhibit the celiac toxic effects of wheat gluten in an in 
vitro model. However, the role of methionine restriction in gluten-induced 
celiac intestinal damage remains unclear. The aim of this study was to explore 
whether dietary methionine restriction could suppress the celiac toxic effects 
of gluten in an in vivo model, thereby mitigating intestine damage. This study 
systematically investigated the effects of dietary methionine restriction on 
celiac characteristic indicators such as symptoms, small intestine damage, and 
intestinal TG2 and IL-15 expression in a gluten-induced C57BL/6 mouse model. The 
availability of dietary methionine restriction in different ages (adolescent and 
adult) was also evaluated. Moreover, mouse cecum contents were assayed and 
co-analyzed for the metagenome of intestinal flora and target short-chain fatty 
acid metabolomics, with the goal of further exploring and elucidating critical 
pathways by which dietary methionine restriction plays a role. We discovered 
that dietary methionine restriction could effectively ameliorate the 
gluten-induced celiac-associated small intestine damage by modulating intestinal 
flora to inhibit butyric acid production. Specifically, dietary methionine 
restriction could inhibit butyric acid production with the help of s_CAG-485 
sp002493045 and s_CAG-475 sp910577815, which in turn affected the mitochondrial 
function within the intestinal epithelial cells to assist in the repair of 
intestine damage. This study might provide new insights into modulating dietary 
patterns to mitigate intestinal damage in celiac disease and the production of 
novel gluten-free products.

DOI: 10.1039/d4fo05757k
PMID: 40018976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]