1. J Intern Med. 2022 Mar;291(3):283-302. doi: 10.1111/joim.13422. Epub 2021 Dec 
22.

Food allergy and hypersensitivity reactions in children and adults-A review.

Tedner SG(1)(2), Asarnoj A(1)(2), Thulin H(3)(4), Westman M(5)(6), Konradsen 
JR(1)(2), Nilsson C(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Pediatric Allergy and Pulmonology Unit at Astrid Lindgren Children's 
Hospital, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Allergy and Lung Department, Sachs' Children and Youth Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical Science and Education Södersjukhuset, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Division of Immunology and Allergy, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Asthma and Allergy Clinic S:t Göran, Stockholm, Sweden.

Adverse reactions after food intake are commonly reported and a cause of concern 
and anxiety that can lead to a very strict diet. The severity of the reaction 
can vary depending on the type of food and mechanism, and it is not always easy 
to disentangle different hypersensitivity diagnoses, which sometimes can exist 
simultaneously. After a carefully taken medical history, hypersensitivity to 
food can often be ruled out or suspected. The most common type of allergic 
reaction is immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated food allergy (prevalence 5-10%). 
Symptoms vary from mild itching, stomach pain, and rash to severe anaphylaxis. 
The definition of IgE-mediated food allergy is allergic symptoms combined with 
specific IgE-antibodies, and therefore only IgE-antibodies to suspected 
allergens should be analyzed. Nowadays, methods of molecular allergology can 
help with the diagnostic process. The most common allergens are milk and egg in 
infants, peanut and tree nuts in children, and fish and shellfish in adults. In 
young children, milk/egg allergy has a good chance to remit, making it important 
to follow up and reintroduce the food when possible. Other diseases triggered by 
food are non-IgE-mediated food allergy, for example, eosinophilic esophagitis, 
celiac disease, food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome, and 
hypersensitivity to milk and biogenic amines. Some of the food 
hypersensitivities dominate in childhood, others are more common in adults. 
Interesting studies are ongoing regarding the possibilities of treating food 
hypersensitivity, such as through oral immunotherapy. The purpose of this review 
was to provide an overview of the most common types of food hypersensitivity 
reactions.

© 2021 The Association for the Publication of the Journal of Internal Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/joim.13422
PMID: 34875122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Foods. 2021 Apr 28;10(5):970. doi: 10.3390/foods10050970.

Oral Mucosa as a Potential Site for Diagnosis and Treatment of Allergic and 
Autoimmune Diseases.

Gomez-Casado C(1), Sanchez-Solares J(1), Izquierdo E(1), Díaz-Perales A(2), 
Barber D(1), Escribese MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Applied Molecular Medicine, Department of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, San Pablo CEU University, 28003 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Center of Plant Biotechnology and Genomics, Technical University of Madrid, 
28040 Madrid, Spain.

Most prevalent food allergies during early childhood are caused by foods with a 
high allergenic protein content, such as milk, egg, nuts, or fish. In older 
subjects, some respiratory allergies progressively lead to food-induced allergic 
reactions, which can be severe, such as urticaria or asthma. Oral mucosa 
remodeling has been recently proven to be a feature of severe allergic 
phenotypes and autoimmune diseases. This remodeling process includes epithelial 
barrier disruption and the release of inflammatory signals. Although little is 
known about the immune processes taking place in the oral mucosa, there are a 
few reports describing the oral mucosa-associated immune system. In this review, 
we will provide an overview of the recent knowledge about the role of the oral 
mucosa in food-induced allergic reactions, as well as in severe respiratory 
allergies or food-induced autoimmune diseases, such as celiac disease.

DOI: 10.3390/foods10050970
PMCID: PMC8146604
PMID: 33925074

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they do not have any 
conflict of interest in relation to this manuscript.


3. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2020 Jan-Dec;34:2058738420950579. doi: 
10.1177/2058738420950579.

Fatal food-induced anaphylaxis: Determination of tryptase and specific IgE on 
cadaveric blood samples. What else for a better methodological standard?

D'Errico S(1), Santurro A(2), Scopetti M(2), Frati P(2), Fineschi V(2).

Author information:
(1)Legal Medicine Division, Sant'Andrea University Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Anatomical, Histological, Forensic and Orthopaedic Sciences, 
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Post-mortem investigation in cases of fatal anaphylaxis is required to provide 
clarifications on the presence of macroscopic pathological changes, histological 
features, and immunohistochemical positivity suggestive of the diagnosis, on 
biochemical evidence of anaphylaxis and on the presence of serological data 
indicative of the allergen responsible for the anaphylactic reaction. We 
describe the case of a 16-year-old boy with a medical history of allergic 
asthma, celiac disease, and known food-induced allergy for fish, fresh milk, 
peanuts, hazelnuts, walnuts, apples, kiwis, and peaches. Acute onset of dyspnea 
followed by cyanosis of the lips and respiratory failure was described 
immediately after having an ice cream sandwich. Unsuccessful rescues were 
immediately attempted with oral administration of betamethasone, intramuscular 
injection of adrenaline, and cardiopulmonary resuscitation. A complete 
post-mortem examination was performed. Serum dosage of mast cell beta-tryptase 
from femoral blood detecting serum values of 41.4 mg/l. Determination of 
specific IgE on cadaveric blood samples confirmed the anamnestic data related to 
sensitization for several food allergens, including cod parvalbumin, 
tropomyosin, brazil nut, omega-5-gliadin of foods derived from wheat and gluten. 
The cause of death was identified in a cardiorespiratory failure due to 
anaphylactic shock in a poly-allergic subject and anaphylaxis was ascribed to 
the wheat contained in the ice cream sandwich eaten immediately before the onset 
of respiratory symptoms. The need is to implement an interdisciplinary approach 
capable to ascertain the sensitivity and specificity of the diagnostic tests 
currently in use as well as to evaluate the possibility of introducing new 
biomarkers in practice.

DOI: 10.1177/2058738420950579
PMCID: PMC7543114
PMID: 33016835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.


4. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2019 Aug;69(2):e43-e48. doi: 
10.1097/MPG.0000000000002343.

Pediatric Celiac Disease and Eosinophilic Esophagitis: Outcome of Dietary 
Therapy.

Patton T(1), Chugh A(2), Padhye L(3), DeGeeter C(4), Guandalini S(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Comer 
Children's Hospital, University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL.
(2)Section of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Medical 
College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI.
(3)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
IL.
(4)Section of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Stead 
Family Children's Hospital, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA.

OBJECTIVE: The coexistence of celiac disease (CeD) and eosinophilic esophagitis 
(EoE) in pediatric patients has been increasingly recognized. In the current 
study, we have aimed to assess the outcomes of therapeutic dietary interventions 
in a cohort of pediatric patients with CeD and EoE.
METHODS: Pediatric patient records obtained from the University of Chicago 
Celiac Center Database from August 2008 to July 2013 were reviewed. Information 
was collected on patients with concomitant CeD and EoE regarding age, sex, dates 
of diagnoses, presenting symptoms, length of symptoms before diagnosis, familial 
and personal atopic history, dietary therapy, and esophageal histologic response 
to dietary therapy.
RESULTS: A total of 350 records of patients with CeD were reviewed. Twenty-two 
(6.3%) had a confirmed diagnosis of CeD and EoE, 17 had repeat biopsies. Four of 
17 (23.5%) had resolution of esophageal eosinophilia on an exclusive gluten-free 
diet, 10 of 17 (59%) required additional eliminations to show histologic 
resolution, 1 of 17 (6%) had not reached histological remission, and 2 of 17 
(12%) were lost to follow-up. Success rates of single food reintroductions were: 
soy 5 of 5 (100%), eggs 3 of 5 (60%), dairy 3 of 7 (43%), nuts 2 of 4 (50%), and 
fish 2 of 4 (50%).
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the largest pediatric study to assess the 
histologic outcome of EoE-associated esophageal eosinophilia in response to 
dietary management of pediatric patients with concomitant CeD and EoE. We 
demonstrate that soy is well tolerated in this cohort, and suggest that 
reintroducing this food first, or trialing a soy-inclusive elimination diet is a 
viable strategy.

DOI: 10.1097/MPG.0000000000002343
PMID: 30921260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Am Diet Assoc. 2011 Dec;111(12):1877-91. doi: 10.1016/j.jada.2011.09.001.

Adverse food reactions--an emerging issue for adults.

Skypala I(1).

Author information:
(1)Royal Brompton & Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. 
i.skypala@rbht.nhs.uk

Adverse reactions to foods are classified according to the presence or absence 
of involvement of the immune system, which may or may not include the production 
of immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies. This review focuses on the epidemiology, 
diagnosis, and management of adverse food reactions, primarily in adults, and 
excluding celiac disease and lactose intolerance. Reported reactions to foods 
are often believed to be manifestations of a food allergy; however, IgE-mediated 
food allergy only affects 1% to 4% of adults, with seafood, tree nuts, peanuts, 
fruits, and vegetables being the most common triggers. Diagnosis is challenging 
and most commonly achieved through careful evaluation of clinical history 
followed by elimination and reintroduction or challenge with the suspected 
offending food. With acute-onset allergic reactions, estimation of food-specific 
IgE antibodies is frequently used to confirm or refute the diagnosis. Recent 
developments, such as single allergen assays, enhance the diagnosis of 
IgE-mediated food allergy, but the gold standard remains oral food challenge. 
Despite recent advances in the management of food allergy, including the 
promotion of oral tolerance, the mainstay of management is still the avoidance 
of food triggers. Dietary management can be compromised by nutritional 
inadequacy, accidental exposure, food labeling, and quality of life or adherence 
issues. It is essential that adults with confirmed food allergy receive optimal 
nutrition and dietetic support to enable them to manage their condition.

Copyright © 2011 American Dietetic Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jada.2011.09.001
PMID: 22117664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2011 Oct;13(5):426-34. doi: 10.1007/s11894-011-0215-7.

Differentiating food allergies from food intolerances.

Guandalini S(1), Newland C.

Author information:
(1)Section of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Celiac Disease Center, University of 
Chicago, 5839 S. Maryland Ave, MC 4065, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. 
sguandalini@peds.bsd.uchicago.edu

Adverse reactions to foods are extremely common, and generally they are 
attributed to allergy. However, clinical manifestations of various degrees of 
severity related to ingestion of foods can arise as a result of a number of 
disorders, only some of which can be defined as allergic, implying an immune 
mechanism. Recent epidemiological data in North America showed that the 
prevalence of food allergy in children has increased. The most common food 
allergens in the United States include egg, milk, peanut, tree nuts, wheat, 
crustacean shellfish, and soy. This review examines the various forms of food 
intolerances (immunoglobulin E [IgE] and non-IgE mediated), including celiac 
disease and gluten sensitivity. Immune mediated reactions can be either IgE 
mediated or non-IgE mediated. Among the first group, Immediate GI 
hypersensitivity and oral allergy syndrome are the best described. Often, but 
not always, IgE-mediated food allergies are entities such as eosinophilic 
esophagitis and eosinophilic gastroenteropathy. Non IgE-mediated immune mediated 
food reactions include celiac disease and gluten sensitivity, two increasingly 
recognized disorders. Finally, non-immune mediated reactions encompass different 
categories such as disorders of digestion and absorption, inborn errors of 
metabolism, as well as pharmacological and toxic reactions.

DOI: 10.1007/s11894-011-0215-7
PMID: 21792544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010 Apr;105(4):940-5. doi: 10.1038/ajg.2010.96. Epub 2010
 Mar 2.

Infant nutritional factors and functional constipation in childhood: the 
Generation R study.

Kiefte-de Jong JC(1), Escher JC, Arends LR, Jaddoe VW, Hofman A, Raat H, Moll 
HA.

Author information:
(1)Department of the Generation R Study Group, Erasmus Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: Food allergy and celiac disease may lead to childhood constipation. 
Early introduction of food allergens and gluten in the first year of life has 
been suggested to have a function in these food intolerances, but it is unclear 
whether this also holds true for development of childhood constipation. The aim 
of this study was to assess the association between the timing of introduction 
of food allergens and gluten early in life and functional constipation in 
childhood.
METHODS: This study was embedded in the Generation R study, a population-based 
prospective cohort study from fetal life until young adulthood. Functional 
constipation at 24 months of age was defined in 4,651 children according to the 
Rome II criteria of defecation frequency <3 times a week or the presence of 
mainly hard feces for at least 2 weeks.
RESULTS: At the age of 24 months, 12% of the children had functional 
constipation. Children with functional constipation got introduced to gluten 
more often before or at the age of 6 months than children without functional 
constipation (37% and 27%, respectively). After adjustment for birth weight, 
gestational age, gender, ethnicity, maternal education, and family history of 
atopy and chronic intestinal disorders, functional constipation was 
significantly associated with early gluten introduction (odds ratio (OR): 1.35; 
95% confidence interval (CI): 1.10-1.65). No association was found between 
timing of introduction of cow's milk, hen's egg, soy, peanuts, and tree nuts 
with functional constipation. A history of cow's milk allergy in the first year 
of life was significantly associated with functional constipation in childhood 
(OR: 1.57; 95% CI: 1.04-2.36).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that early gluten introduction in the first 
year of life provide a trigger for functional constipation in a subset of 
children. In case of functional constipation, there also might be a role for 
cow's milk allergy initiated in the first year of life.

DOI: 10.1038/ajg.2010.96
PMID: 20197763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Biotechnol Adv. 2005 Sep;23(6):409-14. doi: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2005.05.006.

Food allergy and its relevance to industrial food proteins.

Mills EN(1), Breiteneder H.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Food Research, Norwich Research Park, Colney, Norwich, NR4 7UA, 
UK. Clare.mills@bbsrc.ac.uk

Food allergies can be defined as IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reactions and are 
quite distinct from food intolerances, such as Coeliac disease, with symptoms 
usually appearing within a matter of minutes of exposure. Around 1-2% of adults 
and up to 5-7% of children suffer from some type of food allergy with foods such 
as peanuts, tree nuts, wheat and soy, cow's milk, egg, fish and shellfish being 
responsible for the majority of reactions. The macromolecules recognised by IgE 
(generally proteinaceous in nature) are termed allergens. A brief description of 
the allergenic components present in the major allergenic foods is given 
followed by a short discussion regarding their importance in industrial proteins 
in the light of recent food labelling legislation for allergens.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2005.05.006
PMID: 16002252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Monatsschr Kinderheilkd. 1983 Mar;131(3):134-7.

[Gastrointestinal allergy].

[Article in German]

Urbanek R.

One of the more frequent problems in medicine is the question of a possible 
association between ingestion of a particular food or drug, and symptoms 
experienced by a patient. Food allergens are mainly cow's milk, egg, fish, nuts 
and fruits. Ingested antigen/allergen may induce antibody production and thus 
sensitization. But the presence of specific antibodies or a positive skin test 
are not synonymous with allergic symptoms. The convincing diagnostic procedure 
in adverse reactions to foods or drugs is a controlled exposition. The 
thrombocytopenia test is a useful addition. Intestinal biopsy is helpful in 
excluding celiac disease. Younger children are more likely to lose food 
sensitivity than older ones. At present, the optimal therapy of food sensitivity 
is to avoid the offending food or drug.

PMID: 6343847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]