1. Clin Nutr. 2025 May;48:134-143. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2025.03.026. Epub 2025 Apr
 5.

Long term impact of formula choice in children with cow milk protein allergy: 
6-year follow-up of the Atopic March Cohort Study.

Nocerino R(1), Bedogni G(2), Carucci L(3), Aquilone G(4), Oglio F(3), Coppola 
S(3), Masino A(3), Berni Canani R(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medical Science, University of Naples "Federico 
II", Naples, Italy; ImmunoNutritionLab at CEINGE Advanced Biotechnologies, 
University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy; Department of Biomedicine and 
Prevention, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy. Electronic address: 
rita.nocerino@unina.it.
(2)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Alma Mater Studiorum-University 
of Bologna, Bologna, Italy; Department of Primary Health Care, Internal Medicine 
Unit addressed to Frailty and Aging, "S. Maria delle Croci" Hospital, AUSL 
Romagna, Ravenna, Italy.
(3)Department of Translational Medical Science, University of Naples "Federico 
II", Naples, Italy; ImmunoNutritionLab at CEINGE Advanced Biotechnologies, 
University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Translational Medical Science, University of Naples "Federico 
II", Naples, Italy.
(5)Department of Translational Medical Science, University of Naples "Federico 
II", Naples, Italy; ImmunoNutritionLab at CEINGE Advanced Biotechnologies, 
University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy; European Laboratory for the 
Investigation of Food-Induced Diseases, University of Naples "Federico II", 
Naples, Italy; Task Force for Microbiome Studies, University of Naples "Federico 
II", Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Cow's milk protein allergy (CMPA) is a significant health 
issue in the pediatric age, carrying lifelong health implications. To compare 
the impact of different formulas on the occurrence of other atopic 
manifestations (AMs), autoimmune disorders (ADs) and the time of immune 
tolerance acquisition in a population of children with immunoglobulin E 
(IgE)-mediated cow CMPA.
METHODS: In a 72-month prospective cohort study the occurrence of other AMs 
(i.e., eczema, urticaria, asthma, and rhinoconjunctivitis), ADs (i.e., celiac 
disease, thyroiditis, type 1 diabetes, inflammatory bowel diseases, idiopathic 
juvenile arthritis) and the time of immune tolerance acquisition were 
comparatively evaluated in IgE-mediated CMPA children treated with different 
formulas: extensively hydrolyzed casein formula containing the probiotic 
L. rhamnosus G (EHCF + LGG), rice hydrolyzed formula (RHF), soy formula (SF), 
extensively hydrolyzed whey formula (EHWF), or amino-acid based formula (AAF).
RESULTS: 313 subjects were evaluated: EHCF + LGG (n = 64), RHF(n = 62), 
SF(n = 63), EHWF(n = 60) and AAF (n = 64). The incidence of AMs was: 
0.30(Bonferroni-corrected 95%CI 0.15 to 0.44) for EHCF + LGG cohort, 0.68 
(0.52-0.83) for RHF cohort, 0.73 (0.59-0.87) for SF cohort, 0.70 (0.55-0.85) for 
EHWF cohort and 0.83 (0.71-0.95) for AAF cohort. The corresponding risk ratios 
are 2.28 (1.51-3.45) for RHF vs. EHCF + LGG (p < 0.001), 2.46 (1.64-3.69) for SF 
vs. EHCF + LGG (p < 0.001), 2.36 (1.56-3.56) for EHWF vs. EHCF + LGG 
(p < 0.001), and 2.79 (1.88-4.13) for AAF vs. EHCF + LGG (p < 0.001). The 
72-month immune tolerance acquisition rate was higher in the EHCF + LGG cohort. 
The incidence of celiac disease was 2/313 (0.006, binomial exact 95%CI 0.0007 to 
0.023). No cases of other ADs were reported.
CONCLUSION: The dietary treatment with EHCF + LGG is associated with lower 
incidence of AMs and higher rate of immune tolerance acquisition in children 
with CMPA.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clnu.2025.03.026
PMID: 40209535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest Roberto Berni Canani have 
had the following relevant financial relationships with the following 
manufacturers: Biostime (research grant), Ch. Hansen (research grant, speaker), 
DBV (research grant), Dr. Schar (research grant), Humana (research grant), 
iHealth (research grant), Kraft-Heinz (research grant, speaker), Mead Johnson 
Nutrition (research grant, speaker), Nestlè (research grant, speaker), Novalac 
(research grant, speaker), Nutricia (research grant, speaker), Sanofi (research 
grant, speaker) as part of publicly funded research projects with the support of 
the Italian Ministry of Health, the Italian Ministry of the University and 
Research, and the EU. The other authors declared that they have no conflicts of 
interest.


2. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2023 Dec 28;33(12):1552-1562. doi: 
10.4014/jmb.2308.08016. Epub 2023 Aug 28.

Benefits of Soybean in the Era of Precision Medicine: A Review of Clinical 
Evidence.

Kang JH(1), Dong Z(2)(3), Shin SH(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food and Nutrition, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 
52828, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, P.R. China.
(3)China-US (Henan) Hormel Cancer Institute, No.127, Dongming Road, Jinshui 
District, Zhengzhou 450008, Henan, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Bio & Medical Bigdata (BK4 Program), Gyeongsang National 
University, Jinju 52828, Republic of Korea.

Soybean (Glycine max) is an important ingredient of cuisines worldwide. While 
there is a wealth of evidence that soybean could be a good source of 
macronutrients and phytochemicals with health-promoting effects, concerns 
regarding adverse effects have been raised. In this work, we reviewed the 
current clinical evidence focusing on the benefits and risks of soybean 
ingredients. In breast, prostate, colorectal, ovarian, and lung cancer, 
epidemiological studies showed an inverse association between soybean food 
intake and cancer risks. Soybean intake was inversely correlated with risks of 
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), and soy isoflavones ameliorated osteoporosis 
and hot flashes. Notably, soybean was one of the dietary protein sources that 
may reduce the risk of breast cancer and T2DM. However, soybean had adverse 
effects on certain types of drug treatment and caused allergies. In sum, this 
work provides useful considerations for planning clinical soybean research and 
selecting dietary protein sources for human health.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.2308.08016
PMCID: PMC10774093
PMID: 37674385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interests The authors have no 
financial conflicts of interest to declare.


3. Foods. 2022 Apr 19;11(9):1185. doi: 10.3390/foods11091185.

Effective Use of Plant Proteins for the Development of "New" Foods.

Yano H(1), Fu W(1).

Author information:
(1)Food Research Institute, National Agriculture and Food Research Organization, 
Tsukuba 305-8642, Japan.

Diversity in our diet mirrors modern society. Affluent lifestyles and extended 
longevity have caused the prevalence of diabetes and sarcopenia, which has led 
to the increased demand of low-carb, high-protein foods. Expansion of the global 
population and Westernization of Asian diets have surged the number of meat 
eaters, which has eventually disrupted the supply-demand balance of meat. In 
contrast, some people do not eat meat for religious reasons or due to veganism. 
With these multiple circumstances, our society has begun to resort to obtaining 
protein from plant sources rather than animal origins. This "protein shift" 
urges food researchers to develop high-quality foods based on plant proteins. 
Meanwhile, patients with food allergies, especially gluten-related ones, are 
reported to be increasing. Additionally, growing popularity of the gluten-free 
diet demands development of foods without using ingredients of wheat origin. 
Besides, consumers prefer "clean-label" products in which products are expected 
to contain fewer artificial compounds. These diversified demands on foods have 
spurred the development of "new" foods in view of food-processing technologies 
as well as selection of the primary ingredients. In this short review, examples 
of foodstuffs that have achieved tremendous recent progress are introduced: 
effective use of plant protein realized low-carb, high protein, gluten-free 
bread/pasta. Basic manufacturing principles of plant-based vegan cheese have 
also been established. We will also discuss on the strategy of effective 
development of new foods in view of the better communication with consumers as 
well as efficient use of plant proteins.

DOI: 10.3390/foods11091185
PMCID: PMC9102783
PMID: 35563905

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


4. Matern Child Health J. 2020 Oct;24(10):1189-1192. doi: 
10.1007/s10995-020-02970-y.

Guidelines Suggesting Children Avoid Plant-Based Milks: A Closer Examination.

Wright NS(1), Smith M(2).

Author information:
(1)Royal New Zealand College of General Practitioners, 50 Customhouse Quay, 
Wellington, 6011, New Zealand. nicholas.samuel.wright@gmail.com.
(2)Plant Based New Zealand Health Charitable Trust, Gisborne, New Zealand.

Recent Healthy Drinks, Healthy Kids (HDHK) guidelines state children between 12 
and 24 months need to be consuming 2-3 cups a day of whole fat cow's milk, and 
less of all other beverages except water. Guidelines explicitly state 
plant-based milks should be avoided (with the exception of soy milk). We agree 
that in the first 12 months the optimal food for childhood growth is breast 
milk, with formula used where needed. However, after weaning, milk of any kind 
is not required, and should not be relied upon as a main source of calories. 
Children will be fine with water and a healthy balanced diet. Whether cow's milk 
should be consumed is beyond our scope here, however it is clear that 
plant-based milks can easily be included in day-to-day use post-weaning. Used in 
this fashion plant-based milks can be less harmful than dairy milks; at least 
for certain groups. Although cow's milk is rich in calcium, it does not appear 
to clearly reduce fractures, but consumption carries risks including: a 
potential association with type 1 diabetes mellitus onset; anemia in toddlers; 
lactose intolerance; cow's milk protein allergy; and infantile colic. Adverse 
effects from normal consumption must be compared against risks from plant-based 
milks, which are problematic mainly when used inappropriately in otherwise 
unbalanced diets; e.g. with inadequate solid foods. Despite limited evidence of 
serious harms from consumption of plant-based milks, HDHK provides vigorous 
recommendations, especially by comparison to guidelines with more evidence to 
support their stance (such as processed meats causing colorectal cancer).

DOI: 10.1007/s10995-020-02970-y
PMID: 32602067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Molecules. 2020 May 1;25(9):2129. doi: 10.3390/molecules25092129.

Valorisation of By-Products from Soybean (Glycine max (L.) Merr.) Processing.

Colletti A(1), Attrovio A(1), Boffa L(1), Mantegna S(1), Cravotto G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Drug Science and Technology, University of Turin, Via P. Giuria 
9, 10125 Turin, Italy.
(2)Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Centre of Bioanalytical 
Research and Molecular design, 8 Trubetskaya ul, 119991 Moscow, Russia.

In recent years, increased awareness of the health benefits associated with 
consuming soy-based foods, knowledge of milk-related allergies and a move 
towards more sustainable food production have led to an increase in the number 
of available soy-based products. The biggest producers in the world, the USA, 
South America and China, are from the Pacific region. This enormous production 
is accompanied by the accumulation of related by-products, in particular, a 
substance that is known as okara. Okara is a paste that is rich in fibre (50%), 
protein (25%), fat (10%), vitamins and trace elements. Its proper use would lead 
to economic advantages and a reduction in the potential for polluting the 
environment. Its high fibre content and low production costs mean that it could 
also be used as a dietary supplement to prevent diabetes, obesity and 
hyperlipidaemia. Chemical or enzymatic treatment, fermentation, extrusion, high 
pressure and micronisation can all increase the soluble fibre content, and thus 
improve nutritional quality and processing properties. However, the product also 
degrades rapidly due to its high moisture content (70-80%), which makes it 
difficult to handle and expensive to dry by conventional means. The aim of this 
paper is therefore to thoroughly study the existing literature on this subject 
in order to develop a general protocol for okara exploitation and valorisation. 
A cost/benefit analysis could drive the design of eco-friendly, sustainable 
protocols for the preparation of high-value nutritional products.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules25092129
PMCID: PMC7248727
PMID: 32370073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


6. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr. 2018;27(6):1277-1285. doi: 
10.6133/apjcn.201811_27(6).0015.

Soy product and isoflavone intake associations with allergic diseases in 
Japanese workers: rhinitis, dermatitis and asthma.

Nakamoto M(1), Shuto E(2), Nakamoto A(2), Hata A(3), Aki N(3), Shikama Y(3)(4), 
Bando Y(3), Ichihara T(5), Minagawa T(6), Tamura A(6), Kuwamura Y(7), Funaki 
M(3), Sakai T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Applied Nutrition, Institute of Biomedical 
Sciences, the University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan. 
nakamoto@tokushima-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Public Health and Applied Nutrition, Institute of Biomedical 
Sciences, the University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.
(3)Clinical Research Center for Diabetes, Tokushima University Hospital, 
Tokushima, Japan.
(4)National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology, Research Institute, 
Department of Oral Disease Research.
(5)Department of Nursing, Faculty of Medicine, Kagawa University, Kagawa, Japan.
(6)Department of Medical Treatment Recovery Care Nursing, Institute of 
Biomedical Sciences, the University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, 
Japan.
(7)Department of Women's Health Nursing, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, the 
University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to determine the 
associations of intake of soy products and isoflavones with allergic diseases.
METHODS AND STUDY DESIGN: We conducted a cross-sectional study in 1437 
participants (aged 20-64 years) who were living in Tokushima Prefecture, Japan 
during the period 2010- 2011. We obtained anthropometric data and information on 
life style characteristics including dietary intake and current medical 
histories of allergic diseases using a structural self-administered 
questionnaire. Multiple logistic regression models were used to assess the 
associations of soy products and isoflavones with allergic diseases after 
controlling for age, family history of allergic diseases, smoking, drinking, 
physical activity, energy intake, BMI and dietary factors.
RESULTS: Intake of soy products showed significant inverse dose-response 
relationships with allergic rhinitis. The third quartile for soy products had an 
adjusted OR of 0.56 (95% CI: 0.35-0.91) compared to the reference group (first 
quartile), though intake of soy products showed no dose-response relationship 
with atopic dermatitis. Intake of soy isoflavones showed a significant inverse 
dose-response relationship with atopic dermatitis, though the association 
between intake of soy isoflavones and atopic dermatitis was U-shaped after 
adjustments for potential confounders. On the other hand, the associations 
between intake of soy isoflavones and other allergic diseases were not 
significant.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that higher intake of soy products is 
associated with reduced risk of allergic rhinitis in Japanese workers. 
Furthermore, moderate intake amounts of soy products and soy isoflavones are 
associated with inverse risk of atopic dermatitis.

DOI: 10.6133/apjcn.201811_27(6).0015
PMID: 30485927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Recent Pat Food Nutr Agric. 2015;7(2):92-9. doi: 
10.2174/2212798407666150629123957.

Immunomodulatory Effects of Soybeans and Processed Soy Food Compounds.

Tezuka H(1), Imai S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biodefense Research, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan. 
tezco.bre@mri.tmd.ac.jp.

Inflammation is an immune response against both internal and external antigens 
in organisms, particularly in mammals, and includes both uncontrolled chronic 
and low-grade inflammations. Uncontrolled chronic inflammation often leads to 
severe diseases such as vascular disease, arthritis, cancer, diabete, allergy, 
and autoimmunity. On the other hand, low-grade inflammation is recognized as a 
relationship between obesity and risk of metabolic syndrome. Elevated production 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines and mediators is commonly observed in patients 
with uncontrolled or low-grade inflammation-associated diseases. Plants have 
been generated phytochemicals to overcome inflammations and infections through 
evolution. Phytochemicals belong to alkaloids, polyphenols, flavonoids, 
coumarins, and terpenoids. The consumption of soybeans plays a role in immune 
modulation through their components such as isoflavones, saponins, and 
anthocyanins. Recently, it was reported that the application of phytochemicals 
into patients with inflammatory diseases improves their symptoms. Therefore, it 
is important to identify novel phytochemicals with immunomodulatory activities. 
This review introduces and discusses recent advances and patents regarding 
soybean or processed soy food compounds which exhibit immunomodulatory activity 
in immune diseases, particularly allergy, by mediating the suppression of 
inflammatory pathways.

DOI: 10.2174/2212798407666150629123957
PMID: 26118769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr). 2015 Mar-Apr;43(2):157-61. doi: 
10.1016/j.aller.2013.11.009. Epub 2014 Aug 2.

Prevalence of allergic diseases and/or allergic sensitisation in children and 
adolescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus.

Villa-Nova H(1), Spinola-Castro AM(2), Garcia FE(2), Solé D(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy, Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of 
Pediatrics, Federal University of São Paulo-Escola Paulista de Medicina 
(UNIFESP-EPM), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Federal University of 
São Paulo-Escola Paulista de Medicina (UNIFESP-EPM), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(3)Division of Allergy, Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of 
Pediatrics, Federal University of São Paulo-Escola Paulista de Medicina 
(UNIFESP-EPM), São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: 
dirceu.sole@unifesp.br.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of atopic diseases in children with type 1 diabetes 
mellitus (DM1) has been reported as lower. The aim of this study was to evaluate 
the prevalence of allergic diseases and allergic sensitisation in Brazilian 
children and adolescents with DM1.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 96 patients with DM1 (aged 4-18 years, 45 boys) followed 
for at least one year were evaluated for allergic disease through a detailed 
allergological anamnesis and skin prick tests (SPT) to inhalant allergens 
(Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus, D. farinae, Blomia tropicalis, Blattella 
germanica, Periplaneta americana, dog epithelium, cat epithelium, mix fungi), 
foods (cow's milk, egg-white, yolk, soy, wheat, corn), and positive (histamine 1 
mg/ml) and negative (saline) controls. Wheals with a mean diameter of induration 
equal to or greater than 3mm identified a positive SPT.
RESULTS: The prevalence values of rhinitis, asthma and atopic eczema (isolated 
or associated) were 68.0%, 59.1% and 44.4%, respectively. 20.6% of the patients 
had no allergic disease. 46.8% of the patients had been diagnosed with DM1 for 
at least four years and there was no relationship between the period of DM1 and 
the presence of allergic disease, nor of the gender. 48.0% patients were 
sensitised with predominance of D. pteronyssinus, B. topicalis and D. farinae. 
The frequency of positive SPT was significantly higher among patients with 
history of allergic disease (OR=6.98, 95%CI: 2.60-18.74, p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of allergic diseases and sensitisation in patients 
with DM1 was higher than usually expected and deserves further investigation to 
identify possible causes for these findings and to evaluate their importance and 
influence on the metabolic control.

Copyright © 2013 SEICAP. Published by Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aller.2013.11.009
PMID: 25092354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Explore (NY). 2013 Jul-Aug;9(4):251-4. doi: 10.1016/j.explore.2013.04.010.

Yoga for back pain, cranberry for cystitis prevention, soy isoflavones for hot 
flashes, curcumin for pre-diabetes, and breathing retraining for asthma.

Glickman-Simon R(1), Lindsay T.

Author information:
(1)DynaMed, Ipswich, MA, USA.

Comment on
    Thorax. 2009 Jan;64(1):55-61. doi: 10.1136/thx.2008.100867.
    Menopause. 2012 Jul;19(7):776-90. doi: 10.1097/gme.0b013e3182410159.
    Complement Ther Med. 2012 Jun;20(3):107-18. doi: 10.1016/j.ctim.2011.12.009.
    Diabetes Care. 2012 Nov;35(11):2121-7. doi: 10.2337/dc12-0116.
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012 Oct 17;10:CD001321. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD001321.pub5.

DOI: 10.1016/j.explore.2013.04.010
PMID: 23906104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011 Jan 15;650(2-3):694-702. doi: 
10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.10.060. Epub 2010 Nov 2.

The soy isoflavone genistein reverses oxidative and inflammatory state, 
neuropathic pain, neurotrophic and vasculature deficits in diabetes mouse model.

Valsecchi AE(1), Franchi S, Panerai AE, Rossi A, Sacerdote P, Colleoni M.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Farmacologia, Chemioterapia e Tossicologia medica, Università 
degli Studi di Milano, via Vanvitelli 32, 20129 Milano, Italy.

Treatment of diabetes complications remains a substantial challenge. The aim of 
this study was to explore the ability of the soy isoflavone genistein in 
attenuating the signs that follow diabetes onset: nociceptive hypersensitivity, 
oxidative and inflammatory state, nerve growth factor (NGF) decrease and 
vascular dysfunctions. Genistein (3 and 6 mg/kg) was administered to C57BL/6J 
streptozotocin diabetic mice from the 2nd till the 5th week after disease 
induction. The hind paw withdrawal threshold to mechanical stimulation (tactile 
allodynia) was evaluated by a von Frey filament. The oxidative stress was 
assessed measuring: reactive oxygen species by fluorimetric analysis, both the 
lipoperoxide content, as malondialdehyde, the antioxidant enzymatic activities 
spectrophotometrically and the glutathione content spectrofluorimetrically. 
Proinflammatory cytokines and NGF were measured in the sciatic nerve by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Aortic inducible (iNOS) and endothelial 
nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) protein content was measured by western 
immunoblotting. Genistein relieved diabetic peripheral painful neuropathy, 
reverted the proinflammatory cytokine and reactive oxygen species 
overproduction, and restored the NGF content in diabetic sciatic nerve. 
Furthermore it restored the GSH content and the GSH and GSSG ratio, improved the 
antioxidant enzymes activities, decreased reactive oxygen species and 
lipoperoxide level in the brain and liver. Finally it restored the iNOS and eNOS 
content and the superoxide dismutase activity in thoracic aorta. Hyperglycaemia 
and weight decrease were not affected. Genistein is able to reverse a diabetes 
established condition of allodynia, oxidative stress and inflammation, 
ameliorates NGF content and the vascular dysfunction, thus suggesting its 
possible therapeutic use for diabetes complications.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.10.060
PMID: 21050844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]