1. FASEB J. 2025 Feb 28;39(4):e70412. doi: 10.1096/fj.202402531R.

Fructose induces inflammatory activation in macrophages and microglia through 
the nutrient-sensing ghrelin receptor.

Shen Z(1), Liu Z(1), Wang H(1), Landrock D(1), Noh JY(1), Zang QS(2), Lee CH(3), 
Farnell YZ(4), Chen Z(5), Sun Y(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, Loyola University Chicago Health Science Campus, 
Maywood, Illinois, USA.
(3)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Poultry Science, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, 
USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, USA.
(6)Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College 
Station, Texas, USA.

High fructose corn syrup (HFCS) is a commonly used sweetener in soft drinks and 
processed foods, and HFCS exacerbates inflammation when consumed in excess. 
Fructose, a primary component of HFCS; however, it is unclear whether fructose 
directly activates inflammatory signaling. Growth hormone secretagogue receptor 
(GHSR) is a receptor of the nutrient-sensing hormone ghrelin. We previously 
reported that GHSR ablation mitigates HFCS-induced inflammation in adipose 
tissue and liver, shifting macrophages toward an anti-inflammatory spectrum. 
Since inflammation is primarily governed by innate immune cells, such as 
macrophages in the peripheral tissues and microglia in the brain, this study 
aims to investigate whether GHSR autonomously regulates pro-inflammatory 
activation in macrophages and microglia upon fructose exposure. GHSR deletion 
mutants of RAW 264.7 macrophages and the immortalized microglial cell line (IMG) 
were generated using CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing. After treating the cells with 
equimolar concentrations of fructose or glucose for 24 h, fructose increased 
mRNA and protein expression of GHSR and pro-inflammatory cytokines (Il1β, Il6, 
and Tnfα) in both macrophages and microglia, suggesting that fructose activates 
Ghsr and induces inflammation directly in macrophages and microglia. Remarkably, 
GHSR deletion mutants (Ghsrmutant) of macrophages and microglia exhibited 
reduced inflammatory responses to fructose, indicating that GHSR mediates 
fructose-induced inflammation. Furthermore, we found that GHSR regulates 
fructose transport and fructose metabolism and mediates fructose-induced 
inflammatory activation through CREB-AKT-NF-κB and p38 MAPK signaling pathways. 
Our results underscore that fructose triggers inflammation, and reducing HFCS 
consumption would reduce disease risk. Moreover, these findings reveal for the 
first time that the nutrient-sensing receptor GHSR plays a crucial role in 
fructose-mediated inflammatory activation, suggesting that targeting GHSR may be 
a promising therapeutic approach to combat the immunotoxicity of foods that 
contain fructose.

© 2025 The Author(s). The FASEB Journal published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.202402531R
PMCID: PMC11846021
PMID: 39985299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


2. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2025 Jan 14:2024.08.30.610436. doi: 
10.1101/2024.08.30.610436.

Cis-Regulatory Element and Transcription Factor Circuitry Required for Cell-Type 
Specific Expression of FOXP3.

Umhoefer JM(1)(2)(3), Arce MM(1)(2)(3), Whalen S(4), Dajani R(1), Goudy 
L(1)(2)(3), Kasinathan S(1)(5), Belk JA(6), Zhang W(7)(8), Zhou R(1)(7), 
Subramanya S(1), Hernandez R(1), Tran C(1), Kirthivasan N(1)(3), Freimer 
JW(1)(2)(9), Mowery CT(1)(2)(3), Nguyen V(1)(2)(10)(11)(12), Ota M(1)(2)(9), 
Gowen BG(13)(14), Simeonov DR(2)(3), Curie GL(13)(14), Li Z(1)(2), Corn JE(15), 
Chang HY(6)(16), Gilbert LA(17)(18), Satpathy AT(1)(7)(19), Pollard 
KS(4)(20)(21)(22), Marson A(1)(2)(13)(19)(20)(23)(24).

Author information:
(1)Gladstone-UCSF Institute of Genomic Immunology, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Gladstone Institute of Data Science and Biotechnology, San Francisco, CA, 
USA.
(5)Division of Allergy, Immunology, and Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(6)Center for Personal Dynamic Regulomes, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA, USA.
(8)Tetrad Graduate Program, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(10)Diabetes Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(11)UCSF CoLabs, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(12)Department of Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(13)Innovative Genomics Institute, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(14)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(15)Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, ETH Zürich, 
Switzerland.
(16)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(17)Arc Institute, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(18)Department of Urology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(19)Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(20)Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, CA, 
USA.
(21)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(22)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub SF, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(23)UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of 
California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(24)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.

FOXP3 is a lineage-defining transcription factor (TF) for immune-suppressive 
regulatory T cells (Tregs). While mice exclusively express FOXP3 in Tregs, 
humans also transiently express FOXP3 in stimulated conventional CD4+ T cells 
(Tconvs). Mechanisms governing these distinct expression patterns remain 
unknown. Here, we performed CRISPR screens tiling the FOXP3 locus and targeting 
TFs in human Tregs and Tconvs to discover cis-regulatory elements (CREs) and 
trans-regulators of FOXP3. Tconv FOXP3 expression depended on a subset of Treg 
CREs and Tconv-selective positive (TcNS+) and negative (TcNS-) CREs. The CREs 
are occupied and regulated by TFs we identified as critical regulators of FOXP3. 
Finally, mutagenesis of murine TcNS- revealed that it is critical for 
restriction of FOXP3 expression to Tregs. We discover CRE and TF circuitry 
controlling FOXP3 expression and reveal evolution of mechanisms regulating a 
gene indispensable to immune homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.08.30.610436
PMCID: PMC11398386
PMID: 39282425

Conflict of interest statement: A.M. is a cofounder of Site Tx, Arsenal 
Biosciences, Spotlight Therapeutics and Survey Genomics, serves on the boards of 
directors at Site Tx, Spotlight Therapeutics and Survey Genomics, is a member of 
the scientific advisory boards of Site Tx, Arsenal Biosciences, Cellanome, 
Spotlight Therapeutics, Survey Genomics, NewLimit, Amgen, and Tenaya, owns stock 
in Arsenal Biosciences, Site Tx, Cellanome, Spotlight Therapeutics, NewLimit, 
Survey Genomics, Tenaya and Lightcast and has received fees from Site Tx, 
Arsenal Biosciences, Cellanome, Spotlight Therapeutics, NewLimit, Abbvie, 
Gilead, Pfizer, 23andMe, PACT Pharma, Juno Therapeutics, Tenaya, Lightcast, 
Trizell, Vertex, Merck, Amgen, Genentech, GLG, ClearView Healthcare, 
AlphaSights, Rupert Case Management, Bernstein and ALDA. A.M. is an investor in 
and informal advisor to Offline Ventures and a client of EPIQ. The Marson 
laboratory has received research support from the Parker Institute for Cancer 
Immunotherapy, the Emerson Collective, Arc Institute, Juno Therapeutics, 
Epinomics, Sanofi, GlaxoSmithKline, Gilead and Anthem and reagents from 
Genscript and Illumina. C.T.M. is a Bio+Health Venture Fellow at Andreessen 
Horowitz. J.E.C. is a co-founder and SAB member of Serac Biosciences and an SAB 
member of Mission Therapeutics, Relation Therapeutics, Hornet Bio, and Kano 
Therapeutics. The lab of J.E.C. has funded collaborations with Allogene, Cimeio, 
and Serac. H.Y.C. is a co-founder of Accent Therapeutics, Boundless Bio, 
Cartography Biosciences, and Orbital Therapeutics, and is an advisor of 10x 
Genomics and Exai Bio. H.Y.C. was an advisor of Arsenal Bio and Chroma Medicine 
up to Dec. 15, 2024. H.Y.C. is an employee and stockholder of Amgen as of Dec. 
16, 2024. J.W.F. was a consultant for NewLimit, is an employee of Genentech, and 
has equity in Roche. A.T.S. is a founder of Immunai, Cartography Biosciences, 
Santa Ana Bio, and Prox Biosciences, an advisor to 10x Genomics and Wing Venture 
Capital, and receives research funding from Astellas. J.M.U., A.M., M.A., L.G, 
and L.A.G. have filed patents related to this work.


3. Recent Pat Inflamm Allergy Drug Discov. 2019;13(2):115-123. doi: 
10.2174/1872213X13666190621125048.

Ferulic Acid: A Promising Therapeutic Phytochemical and Recent Patents Advances.

Chaudhary A(1), Jaswal VS(1), Choudhary S(2), Sonika(1), Sharma A(3), Beniwal 
V(1), Tuli HS(1), Sharma S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Maharishi Markandeshwar (Deemed to be 
University), Mullana-Ambala-133207, Haryana, India.
(2)Government Senior School Kanol, Shahpur, Kangra, Himachal Pradesh Board of 
School Education - 176215, Himachal Pradesh, India.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Career Point University, Tikker-Kharwarian, 
Hamirpur, Himachal Pradesh 176041, India.

BACKGROUND: Among the various phenolics metabolites, ferulic acid is considered 
as the promising mitigating, restorative and antioxidant agent. Ferulic acid is 
one of the most commonly found natural products in vegetables, for example, 
tomatoes, sweet corn, and in rice grain. Phytochemicals are utilized in the 
treatment of human ailments and these are derived from the dietary compounds.
OBJECTIVE: The present review widely argued the calming restorative capability 
of ferulic acid alongside the scientific evidences and its proposed mechanism 
for activity. Furthermore, we provided the main practical points for the use of 
ferulic acid in oxidative damages during various diseases. Additionally, the 
relevant patents on ferulic acid with various therapeutic potential has been 
discussed.
METHODS: The approach consisted of searching several resources, including 
theses, technical reports, web-based scientific databases such as publications 
on PubMed, ScienceDirect, Springer, PROTA, Google Scholar, and other allied 
databases. Thus, recent patent regarding the role of ferulic acid therapeutic 
potenitial has been discussed.
RESULTS: One hundred and twenty references have been cited in the present review 
article. The cited references were found to be suitable and described the 
therapeutic application of ferulic acid thoroughly.
CONCLUSION: Ferulic acids are known to contrarily down-manage an assortment of 
extracellular and intrcelullular molecular targets related to infection 
movement. Various patents on ferulic acid based moieties have been accounted for 
from 2018. The ferulic acids have a wide scope of impacts against different 
infections like malignant growth, diabetes, cardiovascular and neurodegenerative 
diseases. The current review deals with the antioxidant property of ferulic acid 
and the recent patent describes the role of ferulic acid against human diseases.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1872213X13666190621125048
PMID: 31223096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Br J Nutr. 2018 May;119(10):1157-1167. doi: 10.1017/S0007114518000417. Epub
2018  Mar 28.

Excess free fructose, high-fructose corn syrup and adult asthma: the Framingham 
Offspring Cohort.

DeChristopher LR(1), Tucker KL(2).

Author information:
(1)1Independent Researcher,Eugene, OR 97405,USA.
(2)2Department of Biomedical and Nutritional Sciences,University of 
Massachusetts Lowell,Lowell,MA 01854,USA.

There is growing evidence that intakes of high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS), 
HFCS-sweetened soda, fruit drinks and apple juice - a high-fructose 100 % juice 
- are associated with asthma, possibly because of the high fructose:glucose 
ratios and underlying fructose malabsorption, which may contribute to enteral 
formation of pro-inflammatory advanced glycation end products, which bind 
receptors that are mediators of asthma. Cox proportional hazards models were 
used to assess associations between intakes of these beverages and asthma risk, 
with data from the Framingham Offspring Cohort. Diet soda and orange juice - a 
100 % juice with a 1:1 fructose:glucose ratio - were included for comparison. 
Increasing intake of any combination of HFCS-sweetened soda, fruit drinks and 
apple juice was significantly associated with progressively higher asthma risk, 
plateauing at 5-7 times/week v. never/seldom, independent of potential 
confounders (hazard ratio 1·91, P<0·001). About once a day consumers of 
HFCS-sweetened soda had a 49 % higher risk (P<0·011), moderate apple juice 
consumers (2-4 times/week) had a 61 % higher risk (P<0·007) and moderate fruit 
drink consumers had a 58 % higher risk (P<0·009), as compared with never/seldom 
consumers. There were no associations with diet soda/orange juice. These 
associations are possibly because of the high fructose:glucose ratios, and 
fructose malabsorption. Recommendations to reduce consumption may be inadequate 
to address asthma risk, as associations are evident even with moderate intake of 
these beverages, including apple juice - a 100 % juice. The juice reductions in 
the US Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children 
in 2009, and the plateauing/decreasing asthma prevalence (2010-2013), 
particularly among non-Hispanic black children, may be related. Further research 
regarding the consequences of fructose malabsorption is needed.

DOI: 10.1017/S0007114518000417
PMID: 29587887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nutr Diabetes. 2016 Nov 28;6(11):e234. doi: 10.1038/nutd.2016.46.

The link between soda intake and asthma: science points to the high-fructose 
corn syrup, not the preservatives: a commentary.

DeChristopher LR(1), Uribarri J(2), Tucker KL(3).

Author information:
(1)NY Medical College, Valhalla, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, USA.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory and Nutritional Sciences, University of 
Massachusetts, Lowell, MA, USA.

Recent research conducted by investigators at the National Center for Chronic 
Disease Prevention and Health Promotion-a division of the US Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC)-found that 'Regular-Soda Intake, Independent of 
Weight Status, is Associated with Asthma among US High School Students.' On the 
basis of their review of prior studies, researchers hypothesized that the 
association may be due to high intake of sodium benzoate, a commonly used 
preservative in US soft drinks. But a closer look at these prior research 
studies suggests that there is no strong scientific evidence that the 
preservatives in US soft drinks are associated with asthma. Importantly, other 
recent research suggests that the association may be with the unpaired (excess 
free) fructose in high fructose corn syrup.

DOI: 10.1038/nutd.2016.46
PMCID: PMC5133361
PMID: 27892935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Front Plant Sci. 2014 Sep 8;5:440. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2014.00440. eCollection 
2014.

Flavone-rich maize: an opportunity to improve the nutritional value of an 
important commodity crop.

Casas MI(1), Duarte S(2), Doseff AI(2), Grotewold E(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Applied Plant Sciences, The Ohio State University Columbus, OH, 
USA ; Molecular Cellular and Developmental Biology Graduate Program, The Ohio 
State University Columbus, OH, USA ; Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio 
State University Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State University Columbus, OH, USA 
; Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care, and Sleep, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Heart and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University 
Columbus, OH, USA.
(3)Center for Applied Plant Sciences, The Ohio State University Columbus, OH, 
USA ; Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State University Columbus, OH, 
USA.

Agricultural outputs have resulted in food production continuously expanding. To 
satisfy the needs of a fast growing human population, higher yields, more 
efficient food processing, and food esthetic value, new crop varieties with 
higher caloric intake have and continue to be developed, but which lack many 
phytochemicals important for plant protection and adequate human nutrition. The 
increasing incidence of chronic diseases such as obesity, diabetes and 
cardiovascular diseases, combined with social disparity worldwide prompted the 
interest in developing enhanced crops that can simultaneously address the two 
sides of the current malnutrition sword, increasing yield while providing added 
nutritional value. Flavones, phytochemicals associated with the beneficial 
effects of the Mediterranean diet, have potent anti-inflammatory and 
anti-carcinogenic activities. However, many Mediterranean diet-associated 
vegetables are inaccessible, or lowly consumed, in many parts of the world. 
Maize is the most widely grown cereal crop, yet most lines used for hybrid maize 
production lack flavones. As a first step toward a sustainable strategy to 
increasing the nutritional value of maize-based diets, we investigated the 
accumulation and chemical properties of flavones in maize seeds of defined 
genotypes. We show that the pericarps of the P1-rr genotype accumulate flavones 
at levels comparable to those present in some flavone-rich vegetables, and are 
mostly present in their C- and O-glycosylated forms. Some of these glycosides 
can be readily converted into the corresponding more active health beneficial 
aglycones during food processing. Our results provide evidence that 
nutritionally beneficial flavones could be re-introduced into elite lines to 
increase the dietary benefits of maize.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2014.00440
PMCID: PMC4157551
PMID: 25250036


7. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr). 2015 Mar-Apr;43(2):157-61. doi: 
10.1016/j.aller.2013.11.009. Epub 2014 Aug 2.

Prevalence of allergic diseases and/or allergic sensitisation in children and 
adolescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus.

Villa-Nova H(1), Spinola-Castro AM(2), Garcia FE(2), Solé D(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy, Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of 
Pediatrics, Federal University of São Paulo-Escola Paulista de Medicina 
(UNIFESP-EPM), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Federal University of 
São Paulo-Escola Paulista de Medicina (UNIFESP-EPM), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(3)Division of Allergy, Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of 
Pediatrics, Federal University of São Paulo-Escola Paulista de Medicina 
(UNIFESP-EPM), São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: 
dirceu.sole@unifesp.br.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of atopic diseases in children with type 1 diabetes 
mellitus (DM1) has been reported as lower. The aim of this study was to evaluate 
the prevalence of allergic diseases and allergic sensitisation in Brazilian 
children and adolescents with DM1.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 96 patients with DM1 (aged 4-18 years, 45 boys) followed 
for at least one year were evaluated for allergic disease through a detailed 
allergological anamnesis and skin prick tests (SPT) to inhalant allergens 
(Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus, D. farinae, Blomia tropicalis, Blattella 
germanica, Periplaneta americana, dog epithelium, cat epithelium, mix fungi), 
foods (cow's milk, egg-white, yolk, soy, wheat, corn), and positive (histamine 1 
mg/ml) and negative (saline) controls. Wheals with a mean diameter of induration 
equal to or greater than 3mm identified a positive SPT.
RESULTS: The prevalence values of rhinitis, asthma and atopic eczema (isolated 
or associated) were 68.0%, 59.1% and 44.4%, respectively. 20.6% of the patients 
had no allergic disease. 46.8% of the patients had been diagnosed with DM1 for 
at least four years and there was no relationship between the period of DM1 and 
the presence of allergic disease, nor of the gender. 48.0% patients were 
sensitised with predominance of D. pteronyssinus, B. topicalis and D. farinae. 
The frequency of positive SPT was significantly higher among patients with 
history of allergic disease (OR=6.98, 95%CI: 2.60-18.74, p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of allergic diseases and sensitisation in patients 
with DM1 was higher than usually expected and deserves further investigation to 
identify possible causes for these findings and to evaluate their importance and 
influence on the metabolic control.

Copyright © 2013 SEICAP. Published by Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aller.2013.11.009
PMID: 25092354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2013 Jun;9(6):577-87. doi: 10.1586/eci.13.39.

Improving patient tolerability in immunoglobulin treatment: focus on stabilizer 
effects.

Sun A(1), Teschner W, Yel L.

Author information:
(1)Baxter Biosciences, 4501 Colorado Blvd, Los Angeles, CA 90039, USA.

Various types of excipients are added to immunoglobulin preparations to 
stabilize the product and prevent aggregation and dimer formation. These 
excipients, which are also called stabilizers or additives, are not inert 
chemicals and may have clinical implications. This is one reason why 
immunoglobulin products are not interchangeable. Herein, immunoglobulin 
preparation, excipient types and the differences among sugar stabilizers and the 
amino acids, glycine and proline as excipients, are presented. Preclinical 
studies that unravel the complexities of dimer reduction are summarized. Details 
of patient considerations with respect to excipient content are outlined 
focusing on patients with renal insufficiency, diabetes, corn allergy, 
hereditary fructose intolerance, inborn errors of proline metabolism, DiGeorge 
Syndrome and neuropsychiatric disorders associated with hyperprolinemia. 
Excipients are essential components of immunoglobulin preparations and their 
presence should be a consideration when matching patient needs to product 
characteristics.

DOI: 10.1586/eci.13.39
PMID: 23730887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Int J Dermatol. 2007 Jan;46(1):77-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-4632.2006.02948.x.

Multiple keratoacanthomas in a young woman: report of a case emphasizing medical 
management and a review of the spectrum of multiple keratoacanthomas.

Feldman RJ(1), Maize JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, 
South Carolina, USA.

Comment in
    Int J Dermatol. 2007 Oct;46(10):1105. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-4632.2007.03328.x.

A 27-year-old white woman was referred for consultation with regard to the 
presence of extensive multiple keratotic lesions. She began to develop these 
lesions at the age of 9 years, with healing of the lesions resulting in scar 
formation. A biopsy was performed at the age of 16 years, but the patient was 
unsure of the results. Since then, she had not had any treatment or biopsies, 
and stated that she had not suffered from any health problems during the 
intervening period. She was most concerned about the tumors on her heels and 
soles, which caused difficulty with ambulation. The family history was negative 
for skin diseases, including melanoma, nonmelanoma skin cancer, psoriasis, and 
eczema, and positive for Type II diabetes mellitus. A relative reported that the 
patient's grandfather had similar lesions, but the patient's parents and 
siblings were healthy. She was married and had one child, a 9-year-old daughter. 
Her child had no skin lesions. The patient's only medication was 
Ortho-Tricyclene birth control pills. She had no known drug allergies. Physical 
examination revealed the presence of multiple lesions on her body (Fig. 1). Her 
left superior helix contained a well-demarcated, dome-shaped nodule with a 
rolled, mildly erythematous border with a central hyperkeratotic plug. A similar 
lesion was present in the scaphoid fossa of the left ear and smaller lesions 
were scattered on her face. Numerous lesions were present on the arms and legs 
bilaterally, with the majority of lesions being located on the anterior lower 
legs. There were also lesions present on the palms and soles. The lesions ranged 
in size from 5 mm to 3 cm, the largest being a verrucous exophytic nodule on the 
anterior aspect of her left leg. Overall, there appeared to be two distinct 
types of lesion. One type appeared round, oval, and symmetric with a central 
keratotic plug, similar to that on the ear. The other type was larger, more 
exophytic, and verrucous, including the lesions on the volar surfaces. Also 
present were numerous, irregularly shaped atrophic scars where previous lesions 
had healed spontaneously. There were no oral lesions or lesions on her 
fingernails or toenails, and her teeth and hair were normal. A biopsy was 
obtained from an early lesion on the right dorsal forearm. Histology revealed an 
exo-/endophytic growth having a central crater containing keratinous material 
(Fig. 2). The crater was surrounded by markedly hyperplastic squamous epithelium 
with large squamous epithelial cells having abundant glassy cytoplasm. Some 
cells were dyskeratotic. Within the dermis was a dense, chiefly mononuclear 
inflammatory infiltrate. A buttress of epidermis surrounded the crater. The 
clinical and pathologic data were consistent with keratoacanthomas. Initial 
laboratory screenings revealed elevated triglycerides and total cholesterol, 537 
mg/dL (normal, < 150 mg/dL) and 225 mg/dL (normal, < 200 mg/dL), respectively, 
with all other laboratory results within normal limits. In anticipation of 
starting oral retinoid therapy for her multiple keratoacanthomas, she was 
referred to her primary care physician for control of hyperlipidemia. After her 
lipids had been controlled, she was placed on isotretinoin (Accutane) 40 mg/day. 
There was some interval improvement with regression of some lesions leaving 
atrophic scars. She was also started on topical application of tazarotene 
(Tazorac) for all nonresolving lesions. Possible side-effects from the 
isotretinoin occurred, including dry mouth and eyes. After 8 months of 
isotretinoin, the patient was switched to acitretin (Soriatane) 25 mg to 
determine whether it might have a more beneficial effect on the resistant 
lesions. Many of the larger lesions regressed leaving atrophic scars. The dose 
of acitretin was subsequently increased to 35 mg because the lesions on her heel 
and the ball of her foot persisted. Almost all of the lesions resolved, except 
those on her feet, which are slowly regressing. Currently, the patient is on a 
regimen of acitretin 25 mg once a day with tazarotene 0.1% gel applied directly 
to the few residual keratoacanthomas on her feet, which are slowly improving.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-4632.2006.02948.x
PMID: 17214727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Rev Invest Clin. 2005 May-Jun;57(3):457-72.

[Molecular mechanisms of action and health benefits of polyunsaturated fatty 
acids].

[Article in Spanish]

Rodríguez-Cruz M(1), Tovar AR, del Prado M, Torres N.

Author information:
(1)Uniddad de Investigación Médica en Nutrición, Centro Médico Nacional Siglo 
XXI, IMSS.

Essential polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), linoleic acid n6 (LA) and 
linolenic acid (ALA) n3 obtained from the diet are precursors of the long-chain 
polyunsaturated fatty acids (Lc-PUFAs) arachidonic acid (AA) and docosahexaenoic 
acid (DHA) respectively. Consumption of PUFAs is related with a better 
neurological and cognitive development in newborns. It has been demonstrated 
that consumption of n-6 and n-3 PUFAs decreases blood triglycerides by 
increasing fatty acid oxidation through activation of PPARalpha or by reducing 
the activation of SREBP-1 inhibiting lipogenesis. Dietary PUFAs activate 
PPARalpha and PPARgamma increasing lipid oxidation, and decreasing insulin 
resistance leading in a reduction of hepatic steatosis. Beneficial effects of 
PUFAs have been observed in humans and in animals models of diabetes, obesity, 
cancer, and cardiovascular diseases. It is important to promote the consumption 
of PUFAs. Main food sources of PUFAs n-6 are corn, soy and safflower oil, and 
for PUFAs n-3 are fish, soy, canola oil and, flaxseed. Finally FAO/WHO 
recommends an optimal daily intake of n6/n3 of 5-10:1.

PMID: 16187707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]