1. Clin Transl Allergy. 2024 Nov;14(11):e70008. doi: 10.1002/clt2.70008.

Infants and toddlers with sensitization to peanut are often co-sensitized to 
tree nuts.

Meixner L(1), Heller S(1), Bluhme F(1), Trendelenburg V(1), Beyer K(1), Kalb 
B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Respiratory Medicine, Immunology and Critical Care 
Medicine, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie 
Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

DOI: 10.1002/clt2.70008
PMCID: PMC11538028
PMID: 39501428

Conflict of interest statement: Kirsten Beyer reports advisory board/consulting 
fees or speakers bureau from Aimmune Therapeutics, Bencard, Danone/Nutricia, 
DBV, Hycor, Infectopharm, Mabylon, Meda Pharma/Mylan, Nestle, Novartis and 
ThermoFisher as well as research grants from Aimmune, ALK, Danone/Nutricia, DBV 
Technologies, Hipp, Hycor, Infectopharm and Novartis outside the submitted work. 
Birgit Kalb reports advisory board/consulting fees from Viatris. Valérie 
Trendelenburg received speaker's fees from Nutricia/Danone. Friederike Bluhme, 
Stephanie Heller and Lara Meixner have nothing to disclose.


2. J Allergy Clin Immunol Glob. 2024 Jul 6;3(4):100299. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacig.2024.100299. eCollection 2024 Nov.

Prevalence, severity, and risk factors of eczema among young children and 
adolescents in Saudi Arabia: A national cross-sectional study, 2019.

Al Nahas S(1), Abouammoh N(2), Althagafi W(3), Alomary SA(4), Almutairi AS(5), 
Assiri AM(6), Alqahtani A(4), Abd-Ellatif EE(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health Protection, Dubai Health Authority, Dubai, United 
Arab Emirates.
(2)Department of Family and Community Medicine, College of Medicine, King Saud 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)General Directorate of Health Programs and Chronic Diseases, Asthma Control 
Program, Ministry of Health, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)General Directorate of Health Programs and Chronic Diseases, Ministry of 
Health, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Field Epidemiology Training Program, Ministry of Health, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.
(6)Assitant Agency for the Preventive Health, Ministry of Health, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.
(7)Department of Public Health and Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Mansoura University, Mansoura, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Eczema is a common inflammatory skin disease with a significant 
global health burden. Eczema has a significant impact on quality of life.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to estimate the prevalence, severity, and risk factors 
associated with eczema among schoolchildren in Saudi Arabia.
METHODS: The standardized Global Asthma Network questionnaires and methodology 
were used to conduct a nationwide cross-sectional study across 20 regions in 
Saudi Arabia between March and April 2019. Data were collected from 137 primary 
schools and 140 intermediate schools by using a multistage stratified cluster 
sampling method.
RESULTS: The study included 3614 young children aged 6 to 7 years and 4068 
adolescents aged 13 to 14 years. Current eczema was prevalent among 4.5% of the 
children and 5.1% of the adolescents. Severe eczema was reported in 0.8% and 
0.9% of the young children and adolescents, respectively. Several factors showed 
significant association with eczema. Among the children, eczema was linked 
positively to having a history of chest infections and wheezing in early life, 
as well as to ever attending day care and current exposure to cats. Among the 
adolescents, the main potential risk factors included paracetamol use in the 
previous year, adherence to a lifestyle of vigorous physical activity, and 
current exposure to cats. Conversely, high consumption of nuts was found to be 
negatively associated with eczema.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of eczema in schoolchildren in Saudi Arabia is lower 
than the global average but within the average range for the Eastern 
Mediterranean region. Further studies in Saudi Arabia should be conducted to 
identify variation among different regions.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacig.2024.100299
PMCID: PMC11338081
PMID: 39170912

Conflict of interest statement: Supported by the Saudi Ministry of Health. 
Disclosure of potential conflict of interest: The authors declare that they have 
no relevant conflicts of interest. Data availability statement: The data set 
used in the current study is managed and maintained by the Asthma Control 
Program at the General Directorate of Health Programs and Chronic Diseases, 
Ministry of Health, Saudi Arabia. On reasonable request and with permission from 
the data owners, interested individuals may obtain the data sets used in this 
study from the corresponding author.


3. Front Nutr. 2024 Jun 13;11:1373110. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2024.1373110.
eCollection  2024.

Food allergies around the world.

Wong GW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

The increase in the prevalence of food allergy has been considered as the second 
wave in the allergy epidemic following the first wave of increase in asthma and 
allergic rhinitis. It is well known that the prevalence of allergic conditions 
would follow economic development and urbanization in many countries or regions. 
In developed countries, one in three children suffered from at least one 
allergic disorder and these conditions include food allergy, eczema, allergic 
rhinitis and asthma. Food allergy is very often the first allergic manifestation 
affecting infants and young children. The exact etiologies are not known. The 
clinical manifestations ranged from a simple rash or an itch around the mouth, 
to the more severe manifestations of angioedema and potentially fatal 
anaphylaxis. Among all cases of childhood anaphylaxis, food is the most common 
cause. The common allergens resulting in food allergies in developed countries 
include egg, milk, fish, wheat, peanuts and tree nuts. However, there are marked 
variations in the patterns of food allergens in developing countries. In line 
with the epidemiology of asthma, food allergy is also much less common in rural 
areas. Clear understanding of reasons explaining the disparity of food allergies 
between urban and rural population would pave the way to the development of 
effective primary prevention for food allergy.

Copyright © 2024 Wong.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2024.1373110
PMCID: PMC11208673
PMID: 38938666

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


4. Nutrients. 2024 May 23;16(11):1578. doi: 10.3390/nu16111578.

Feasibility and Safety of the Early Introduction of Allergenic Foods in Asian 
Infants with Eczema.

Harama D(1), Saito-Abe M(1)(2), Hamaguchi S(1)(3), Fukuie T(1), Ohya Y(1)(2), 
Yamamoto-Hanada K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Allergy Center, National Center for Child Health and Development, 2-10-1 
Okura, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.
(2)Medical Support Center for the Japan Environment and Children's Study, 
National Research Institute for Child Health and Development, 2-10-1 Okura, 
Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Tokyo Metropolitan Hiroo Hospital, 2-34-10 Ebisu, 
Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 150-0013, Japan.

BACKGROUND: There is a lack of data regarding the early introduction of the 
consumption of allergenic food among Asian infants.
METHODS: We examined infants who had early-onset eczema before 6 months of age 
and received instructions from certified allergists for the early introduction 
of hen's eggs, milk, wheat, peanuts, and tree nuts.
RESULTS: The consumption rates of hen's eggs were 100% at 24 months. For peanuts 
and walnuts, the consumption rate was moderate at 12 months (48.5% and 30.3%, 
respectively), but by 24 months, it had progressed to 78.8% and 81.3%, 
respectively. In contrast, cashews remained at lower levels than other allergens 
at 20.7% at 12 months and 41.4% at 24 months. No adverse events related to early 
introductions occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: In infants with eczema, allergenic foods could be introduced early 
and well tolerated in Asian infants. However, having eczema may indicate a 
predisposition to food allergies, so caution is necessary when introducing 
allergenic foods. The early introduction of peanuts and tree nuts was still more 
challenging in real-world practice in Asia as well as in Western countries.

DOI: 10.3390/nu16111578
PMCID: PMC11174384
PMID: 38892510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


5. Allergol Select. 2024 May 3;8:90-198. doi: 10.5414/ALX02444E. eCollection
2024.

AWMF mold guideline "Medical clinical diagnostics for indoor mold exposure" - 
Update 2023 AWMF Register No. 161/001.

Hurraß J(1)(2)(3), Heinzow B(4)(2), Walser-Reichenbach S(4)(2)(3), Aurbach 
U(5)(6)(2), Becker S(7)(2), Bellmann R(8)(2), Bergmann KC(9)(2)(3), Cornely 
OA(10)(2), Engelhart S(11)(2)(3), Fischer G(12)(2), Gabrio T(13)(2), Herr 
CEW(14)(15)(2)(3), Joest M(16)(2), Karagiannidis C(17)(18)(2), Klimek 
L(19)(2)(3), Köberle M(20)(2)(3), Kolk A(21)(2), Lichtnecker H(22)(2), 
Lob-Corzilius T(23)(2)(3), Mülleneisen N(24)(2)(3), Nowak D(25)(2)(3), Rabe 
U(26)(2)(3), Raulf M(27)(2)(3), Steinmann J(28)(2), Steiß JO(29)(30)(2)(3), 
Stemler J(10)(2), Umpfenbach U(31)(2), Valtanen K(32)(2), Werchan B(33)(2), 
Willinger B(34)(2)(3), Wiesmüller GA(5)(6)(35)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Section for Hygiene in Healthcare Facilities, Division of Infection Control 
and Environmental Hygiene, Cologne Health Department, Cologne.
(2)Co-author.
(3)Member of a scientific medical society, a society or a medical association 
with voting rights.
(4)Formerly: State Agency for Social Services (LAsD) Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel.
(5)Laboratory Dr. Wisplinghoff.
(6)ZfMK - Center for Environment, Hygiene and Mycology Cologne, Cologne.
(7)Department for Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical 
Center Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine I, Medical University of Innsbruck, 
Innsbruck, Austria.
(9)Institute of Allergology Charité, Charité - University Medicine Berlin, 
Berlin.
(10)Institute for Translational Research, CECAD Cluster of Excellence, 
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany and Department I for Internal Medicine, 
Cologne University Hospital, Cologne.
(11)Institute for Hygiene and Public Health, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn.
(12)Baden-Württemberg State Health Office in the Stuttgart Regional Council, 
Stuttgart.
(13)Formerly: Baden-Württemberg State Health Office in the Stuttgart Regional 
Council, Stuttgart.
(14)Bavarian Health and Food Safety Authority, Munich.
(15)Environmental Health and Prevention, Institute and Polyclinic for 
Occupational, Social and Environmental Medicine, University of Munich Hospital 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich.
(16)Allergological-Immunological Laboratory, Helios Lung and Allergy Center 
Bonn, Bonn.
(17)Faculty of Health, Professorship for Extracorporeal Lung Replacement 
Procedures, University of Witten/Herdecke, Witten/Herdecke.
(18)Lung Clinic Cologne Merheim, Clinics of the City of Cologne, Cologne.
(19)Center for Rhinology and Allergology, Wiesbaden.
(20)Department of Dermatology and Allergy Biederstein, School of Medicine, 
Technical University of Munich, Munich.
(21)Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (IFA) of the German Social 
Accident Insurance (DGUV), Unit Biological Agents, Sankt Augustin.
(22)Medical Institute for Environmental and Occupational Medicine MIU GmbH 
Erkrath, Erkrath.
(23)Scientific working group of environmental medicine of the German Society of 
Pediatric Allergology (GPAU).
(24)Asthma and Allergy Center Leverkusen, Leverkusen.
(25)Institute and Polyclinic for Occupational, Social and Environmental 
Medicine, member of the German Center for Lung Research, Hospital of the 
University of Munich, Munich.
(26)Center for Allergology and Asthma, Johanniter Hospital Treuenbrietzen, 
Treuenbrietzen.
(27)Institute for Prevention and Occupational Medicine of the German Statutory 
Accident Insurance, Institute of the Ruhr University Bochum (IPA), Bochum.
(28)Center for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Giessen 
and Marburg GmbH, Giessen.
(29)Specialized Practice in Allergology and Pediatric Pulmonology in Fulda, 
Fulda.
(30)Institute for Clinical Hygiene, Medical Microbiology and Clinical 
Infectiology, Paracelsus Private Medical University Nuremberg Clinic, Nuremberg.
(31)Doctor for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Pediatric Pulmonology, 
Environmental Medicine, Classical Homeopathy, Asthma Trainer, Neurodermatitis 
Trainer, Viersen.
(32)FG II 1.4 Microbiological Risks, German Environment Agency, Berlin.
(33)German Pollen Information Service Foundation (PID), Berlin, Germany.
(34)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Clinical Microbiology - 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, and.
(35)Institute for Occupational, Social and Environmental Medicine, Uniclinic 
RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany.

None.

© Dustri-Verlag Dr. K. Feistle.

DOI: 10.5414/ALX02444E
PMCID: PMC11097193
PMID: 38756207

Conflict of interest statement: See Table 14. Figure 1Incubation period [775, 
778].Figure 2Temporal relationship between sensitization and first allergic 
reaction [775, 778].Figure 3Latency period [775, 778]. Figure 4Annual course of 
the occurrence of mold spores in the outdoor air, spore concentrations as weekly 
values in spores/m3 air, pollen trap in Leverkusen. Source: Mülleneisen 2023, 
unpublished data. A volumetric spore trap based on the Hirst principle was used 
to determine the concentration [269] with associated microscopic analysis of the 
samples. The measurement method is standardized [738].Figure 5Monthly course of 
spore concentrations (in spores/m3 of air) in the outdoor air for several mold 
genera as an example for one year and one measuring station in Germany: a) 
Pleospora 2021 – Berlin measuring station, b) Cladosporium 2021 – Chemnitz 
measuring station, c) Alternaria 2021 – Berlin measuring station, d) Epicoccum 
2021 – Berlin measuring station. Missing data at the Chemnitz station in the 
periods: February 24, 2021 to March 1, 2021 and April 1, 2021 to April 6, 2021. 
The figure was provided by the German Pollen Information Service Foundation 
(Stiftung Deutscher Polleninformationsdienst). The concentration was determined 
using volumetric spore traps based on the Hirst principle [269] followed by 
microscopic analysis of the samples. The measurement procedure is standardized 
[738].Risk matrix 1. Risk of infection by mold (The darker a box, the greater 
the possible health risk.). Risk matrix 2.Risk of sensitization/risk of allergy 
caused by mold (the darker the color, the greater the possible health risk). 
*Proof of the clinical relevance of a sensitization determined in the allergy 
test required! Table 2.Important sources of frequently occurring mold species 
and genera (examples from practical investigations). Species or genusImportant 
sourcesCladosporium herbarum, Alternaria alternata, Botrytis cinereaVegetation, 
outdoor air-associatedAspergillus versicolor complex and Scopulariopsis 
brevicaulisDamp plasterXerophilic Aspergillus species of the Restrictus complex 
(esp. A. penicillioides and A. restrictus) as well as Aspergillus 
glaucus/pseudoglaucus and A. montevidensis, Wallemia sebiCellulose-containing 
materials with only slightly increased moistureAspergillus fumigatusComposting, 
rotting of plant material, indicator for thermotolerant processesChaetomium 
spp., Trichoderma spp., Phialophora spp.Colonizer of damp wood and cellulose 
materials such as cardboardPenicillium speciesPerishable food, waste, organic 
waste and wallpaper, house dustSarocladium strictum, Parengyodontium album, 
Lecanicillium psalliotae and Simplicillium spp.Polystyrene floor insulation with 
prolonged moisture penetrationStachybotrys chartarum, Acremonium spp, Chaetomium 
spp.Very moist, cellulose-containing building materialsWallemia sebi, 
Aspergillus restrictus complexKeeping caged animals with bedding Table 
3.Examples of species complexes based on molecular analyses (modified according 
to [297]). Complex or groupSelected speciesMolecular markers for 
differentiationAspergillus versicolor complexA. versicolor, A. amoenus, A. 
creber, A. jensenii, A. protuberus, et al.CaM, β-TubAspergillus niger complexA. 
niger, A. acidus, A. aculeatus, A. brasiliensis, A. tubingensis, et al.CaM, 
β-TubAspergillus fumigatus complexA. fumigatus, A. lentulus, A. novofumigatus, 
A. fumigatiaffinis, et al.CaM, β-Tub (Note: Cultivation at 37 °C; 
Differentiation A. lentulus)Fusarium solani complexF. solani, F. 
keratoplasticum, F. petroliphilum, F. lichenicola, et al.EF-1α, RPB-1 and/or 
RPB-2 Table 4.Evidence for the relationship between indoor moisture/mold 
exposure and disease (in alphabetical order), modified from [7, 39, 45, 58, 59, 
74, 78, 79, 80, 101, 108,111, 116, 119, 131, 133, 162, 169, 175, 181, 182, 183, 
201, 202, 204, 211, 212, 245, 263, 273, 275, 287, 289, 291, 298, 303, 316, 319, 
322, 338, 363, 370, 394, 437, 442, 444, 445, 449, 450, 451, 462, 465, 466, 467, 
490, 499, 501, 504, 509, 514, 520, 521, 522, 525, 526, 528, 532, 534, 537, 540, 
546, 547, 552, 553, 568, 569, 596, 598, 632, 635, 642, 643, 644, 645, 652, 655, 
694, 698, 717, 722, 742, 746, 754, 756, 757, 777, 783, 790, 791, 794, 797]. 
Causal relationship Sufficient evidence for an association1Allergic 
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) Allergic bronchopulmonary mycoses (ABPM) 
Allergic respiratory diseases Allergic rhinitis Allergic rhinoconjunctivitis 
Aspergilloma Aspergillosis Aspergillus bronchitis Asthma (manifestation, 
progression, exacerbation) Bronchitis (acute, chronic) Community-acquired 
aspergillus pneumonia Favoring respiratory infections Hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis (HP); extrinsic allergic alveolitis (EAA) Invasive aspergillosis 
Mycoses Organic dust toxic syndrome (ODTS) (workplace) Pulmonary aspergillosis 
(subacute, chronic) Rhinosinusitis (acute, chronic invasive or granulomatous, 
allergic)Limited or suspected evidence of an associationAtopic eczema / atopic 
dermatitis / neurodermatitis (manifestation) Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) Mood disorders Mucous membrane irritation (MMI) Odor effects 
SarcoidosisInadequate or insufficient evidence for an associationAcute 
idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage in children Airborne mycotoxicosis Arthritis 
Autoimmune diseases Cancer Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) Endocrinopathies 
Gastrointestinal effects Multiple Chemical Sensitivity (MCS) Multiple sclerosis 
Neuropsychological effects Neurotoxic effects Sudden infant death syndrome Renal 
effects Reproductive disorders Rheumatism Sick building syndrome (SBS) 
Teratogenicity Thyroid diseases Urticaria 1The diseases listed here can be 
subsumed under the term Building Related Illness (BRI), even though BRI requires 
that the etiology, pathology, pathophysiology, diagnosis, treatment, prevention 
and prognosis are clearly known [429, 663]. Table 5.Examples of typical antigens 
and antigen sources for hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP; extrinsic allergic 
alveolitis (EAA) (mod. after Costabel et al. 2020 [113]). AntigenAntigen 
sourceHP typeBacteria   Thermophilic actinomycetesMoldy hay and straw Farmer’s 
lungSugar cane dustBagassosis   Klebsiella oxytocaHumidifierHumidifier lung 
Mycobacteria   Mycobacterium avium complexWhirlpoolsWhirlpool lung (hot tub 
lung)   Mycobacterium immunogenumCooling lubricantsMachinist’s 
lungMushrooms   Absidia corymbiferaMoldy hay and straw Farmer’s 
lung   Trichosporon cutaneumInteriorsSummer-type alveolitis   Penicillium 
roquefortiCheese production/industrial sourcesCheese washer lung 
   Purpureocillium lilacinum, Aspergillus spp. Wind instrumentsWind instrument 
alveolitisAnimal proteins   Feathers and excrementBirdsBird keeper lung   Serum 
and urineRatsRat protein alveolitisPlant proteins   Nut dustTiger nutsTigernut 
alveolitis   Soy dustSoy productsSoy dust alveolitis   Wood dustVarious wood 
dustsWoodworker’s alveolitisEnzymes   PhytaseAnimal feed productionPhytase 
alveolitis   Enzymes from Bacillus subtilisBiological cleaning agentDetergent 
lung Table 6.Diagnostic criteria for allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. a) 
Diagnostic criteria for allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis according to 
Rosenberg et al. [586]:Main criteria:   1. Bronchial asthma    2. Positive 
immediate reaction in the skin test for Aspergillus fumigatus   3. Total IgE > 
417 IU/mL   4. Positive specific IgE against Aspergillus fumigatus   5. IgG 
antibodies against Aspergillus fumigatus   6. Blood eosinophilia (> 1,000 
Eos/µL)   7. Central bronchiectasis   8. Radiological volatile or permanent 
pulmonary infiltratesSecondary criteria   Tough mucus plugs   Positive sputum 
culture for Aspergillus fumigatus   Late reaction in the intradermal test for 
Aspergillus fumigatusb) Modified ISHAM diagnostic criteria for allergic 
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis 2021 [616]:Combination of criteria with best 
sensitivity/specificity:   1. Bronchial asthma   2. Aspergillus 
fumigatus-specific IgE > 0.35 kU/L   3. Total IgE > 500 IU/mLand at least two of 
the following criteria:   1. Aspergillus fumigatus-specific IgG > 27 mgA/dL   2. 
Bronchiectasis in CT thorax   3. Eosinophilia in the blood count > 500/µL Table 
7.Mold mycoses and their pathogens [712]. Infectious disease (invasive 
mycosis)Pathogen (risk group according. TRBA 460 (2016) [712]AspergillosisA. 
fumigatus (2)A. flavus (2)A. niger (complex) (1, 2)A. terreus (2)A. nidulans 
(1)MucormycosisRhizopus oryzae (2)Mucor sp. (1)Rhizomucor 
(1)PhaeohyphomycosesCurvularia sp. (1)Bipolaris sp. (1)Alternaria sp. 
(1)HyalohyphomycosesFusarium sp. (1, 2)Pseudallescheria sp.= Scedosporium sp. 
(2)PenicilliosesTalaromyces (formerly Penicillium) marneffei (2) Table 
8.Differential diagnosis of extrinsic allergic alveolitis (EAA) and organic dust 
toxic syndrome (ODTS) [354]. FeaturesEAAODTSExposureVarious allergensEndotoxins, 
high exposureIncidence2 – 30 / 10,00010 – 100 / 10,000Latency4 – 8 hours4 – 12 
hoursAuscultationEnd-expiratory rales on both sides basalNormal, possibly 
rattling noisesLung functionRestriction (rarely obstruction, DLCO reducedNormal 
(possible restriction)PrecipitinsOften specific IgGMostly negative Table 
9.Immunosuppression risk groups of the Commission for Hospital Hygiene and 
Infection Prevention (KRINKO) at the Robert Koch Institute [349]. Risk group 1 
(moderate immunosuppression/deficiency)– Granulocytopenia < 0.5 × 109 /L; (< 
500/µL) probably up to 10 days (analogous to leukopenia < 1 × 109 /L; < 
1,000/µL), – Autologous stem cell transplantation up to 3 months after day 0 
(day of stem cell return) – Lack of CD4-positive T helper cells < 200/µL 
(Caveat: age-appropriate normal values in children) – Autologous stem cell 
transplantation up to 3 months after intensive therapy phase Patients who have 
more than one characteristic of the immunosuppression/deficiency listed under 
risk group 1 are assigned to risk group 2.Risk group 2 (severe 
immunosuppression/deficiency)– Granulocytopenia < 0.5 × 109 /L (< 500/μL) for 
more than 10 days (analogous to leukopenia < 1× 109 /L; < 1,000/μL) – Severe 
aplastic anemia or macrophage activation syndrome during intensive 
immunosuppressive therapy – Allogeneic bone marrow or stem cell transplantation 
up to 6 months after completion of the intensive therapy phase (important: 
extent of GVHD and ongoing iatrogenic immunosuppression) – Acute inpatient 
treatment phase for autologous stem cell transplantation or after solid organ 
transplantation (until discharge)Risk group 3 (very severe 
immunosuppression/deficiency)– Allogeneic BMT/PBSCT in intensive therapy phase 
(until engraftment = regeneration of granulopoiesis) – Severe GVHD grade III or 
IV under intensive immunosuppression The decision to assign patients after 
allogeneic stem cell transplantation to group 3 is ultimately made by the 
treating hematologist-oncologist after reviewing all findings.GVHD = 
graft-versus-host-disease = graft-versus-host-reaction; BMT = mone marrow 
transplantation; PBSCT = peripheral blood stem cell transplantation. Table 
1.Medline search on the topic of the guideline (as of 12-2014 and 6-2022). 
KeywordsNumber of publications found Status 12-2014 [777]Number of publications 
found Status 6-2022Indoor mo(u)ld or indoor dampness and human 
health1,9493,145Indoor mo(u)ld or indoor dampness and human health and 
allergy1,8753,126Indoor mo(u)ld asthma440805Indoor mo(u)ld health 
asthma285564Indoor mo(u)ld human health asthma494Indoor mo(u)ld 
allergy1,198Indoor mo(u)ld health allergy434774Indoor mo(u)ld human health 
allergy689Indoor mo(u)ld atopy89Indoor mo(u)ld health atopy2459Indoor mo(u)ld 
human health atopy55Indoor mo(u)ld arthritis8Indoor mo(u)ld health 
arthritis4Indoor mo(u)ld human health arthritis3Indoor mo(u)ld rheumatism5Indoor 
mo(u)ld health rheumatism4Indoor mo(u)ld human health rheumatism3Mo(u)ld 
arthritis rheumatism4662Indoor mo(u)ld arthritis rheumatism2Indoor mo(u)ld 
health arthritis rheumatism2Indoor mo(u)ld human health arthritis 
rheumatism1Indoor mo(u)ld infection750Indoor mo(u)ld health infection74435Indoor 
mo(u)ld human health infection357Indoor mo(u)ld irritation113Indoor mo(u)ld 
health irritation4295Indoor mo(u)ld human health irritation85Indoor mo(u)ld 
symptoms1,159Indoor mo(u)ld health symptoms449724Indoor mo(u)ld human health 
symptoms594Indoor mo(u)ld ergosterol50Indoor mo(u)ld health ergosterol2436Indoor 
mo(u)ld human health ergosterol27Indoor mo(u)ld review450Indoor mo(u)ld health 
review301Indoor mo(u)ld human health review160266Indoor mo(u)ld trial67Indoor 
mo(u)ld health trial40Indoor mo(u)ld human health trial1732Indoor mo(u)ld 
clinical diagnosis89194Indoor mo(u)ld health clinical diagnosis113Indoor mo(u)ld 
human health clinical diagnosis93Indoor mo(u)ld diagnostic / 
diagnostics800Indoor mo(u)ld health diagnostic / diagnostics273449Indoor mo(u)ld 
human health diagnostic / diagnostics353Indoor mo(u)ld prevention654Indoor 
mo(u)ld health prevention216433Indoor mo(u)ld human health prevention358Indoor 
mo(u)ld treatment650Indoor mo(u)ld health treatment229360Indoor mo(u)ld human 
health treatment293Indoor mo(u)ld therapy507Indoor mo(u)ld health 
therapy196291Indoor mo(u)ld human health therapy250Indoor mo(u)ld air 
filter174Indoor mo(u)ld health air filter5494Indoor mo(u)ld human health air 
filter55 Table 10.Stage I - IV after conjunctival provocation test (CPT) [235]. 
Stage IForeign body sensation, reddening of the conjunctiva, onset of 
itchingStage IIAs I, plus lacrimation, more intense itching, reddening of the 
conjunctiva tarsi of the lower eyelidStage IIIAs II, additionally reddening of 
the conjunctiva tarsi of the upper eyelid, severe itching, blepharospasmStage 
IVAs III, additionally chemosis, eyelid swelling, irresistible itching Table 
11.Selection of diagnostic methods without sufficient scientific evidence or 
without a medical or scientific basis in environmental medicine [5, 73, 232, 
283, 350, 351, 352, 353, 355, 357, 512, 535, 684]. Diagnostic methods without 
sufficient scientific evidenceStress tests in body mediae.g., molds in the 
bloodAllergological examinationse.g., serial dilution titration, cytotoxic blood 
tests, determination of IgG and IgA antibodies directed against molds in type I 
allergiesInvestigations into disorders of the immune systeme.g., lymphocyte 
stimulation test, determination of lymphocyte subpopulations, determination of 
cytokinesInvestigations of the oxidative systeme.g., determination of oxidative 
stressOphthalmological examinationse.g., visual contrast sensitivity Test (VCS 
test)Diagnostic methods without a medical or scientific basisHolistic or 
bioenergetic diagnostic procedurese.g., electro-acupuncture according to Voll, 
bioresonance procedures, pendulum, Vega test, decoder dermography, biotonometry, 
biotensor, Kirlian photography (plasma print procedure, energetic terminal point 
diagnosis), regulation thermography according to Rost, auriculodiagnostics, 
kinesiology, aurascopy, iris diagnostics“Clinical ecology” proceduree.g., 
cytotoxic blood tests, provocation and neutralization test (PN test) Table 
12.Examples of treatment methods without sufficient scientific evidence or 
without a medical or scientific basis in environmental medicine [5, 73, 160, 
384, 512, 762]. Treatment methods without sufficient scientific evidence 
Antifungal treatment not in line with guidelines Detoxification therapy, e.g., 
with cholestyramine (CSM therapy) Dietary changes Homeopathic treatments 
Symbiosis controlTreatment methods without a medical or scientific basis 
Bioresonance therapy (Moratherapy) Autologous blood and urine treatment Holistic 
intestinal cleansing Salt therapy Clinical ecology procedures (e.g., provocation 
and neutralization test (PN test)) Table 13.Cochrane EBM Review by Sauni et al. 
(2011) [614] on the success of remediation measures after moisture or mold 
damage in relation to asthma and respiratory symptoms as well as the frequency 
of colds in adults and children. MeasureEffect on adultsEffect on childrenHome 
renovation (Evidence level: moderate)Wheezing (asthma): OR 0.64 (KI: 0.55 – 
0.75) Rhinitis: OR 0.57 (CI: 0.55 – 0.66) Acute treatments (mean difference): MD 
–0.45 (KI: –0.76 – –0.14) Table 14.The authors’ declarations of conflicts of 
interest and their assessment are presented below: Consultant or expert 
activityCollaboration in a scientific advisory boardPaid lecturing or training 
activitiesPaid authors or co-author-shipResearch projects / conducting clinical 
studiesProprietary interests (patent, copyright, share ownership)Indirect 
interestsTopics of the guideline affected by COI; classification of the conflict 
of interest (IC) with regard to relevance, consequenceDr. med. Ute 
AurbachNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC Consequence: nonePriv.-Doz. Dr. med. 
Sven BeckerNoYesYesNoYesNoBoard member AeDAClassification: moderate IC; 
consequence: no voting authorization for allergological topicsProf. Dr. med. 
Romuald BellmannYesYesYesNoNoNoMandate holder ÖGMMClassification: moderate IC; 
consequence: no eligibility for antifungal therapyProf. Dr. med. Karl-Christian 
BergmannYesYesYesNoNoNoMandate holder DGPClassification: moderate IC; 
consequence: not eligible to vote on asthma-related issuesProf. Dr. med. Oliver 
A. CornelyYesYesYesNoNoNoNoClassification: moderate IC; consequence: no voting 
rights for mycosis-related topicsProf. Dr. med. Steffen 
EngelhartNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder GHUP and DGKH, Member of the Board 
GHUPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. nat. Guido 
FischerNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. nat. 
Thomas GabrioNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. med. 
Birger HeinzowNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneProf. Dr. 
med. Caroline E.W. HerrNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder and President of the 
GHUPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. nat. Julia 
HurraßNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder and board member of the GHUPClassification: no 
IC; Consequence: noneDr. med. Marcus JoestNoNoYesNoNoNoNoClassification: low IC; 
consequence: no management function (coordination/AG management)Prof. Dr. med. 
Christian KaragiannidisNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot 
specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedClassification: not possible; consequence: 
not entitled to voteProf. Dr. med. Ludger KlimekNoYesYesNoYesNoMandate holder 
AeDAClassification: moderate IC; consequence: no voting rights for 
immunotherapyDr. rer. nat. Martin KöberleNoNoYesNoNoNoMandate holder 
DDGClassification: low IC; consequence: no management function (coordination/AG 
management)Dr. rer. nat. Annette KolkNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot 
specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedClassification: not possible; 
consequence: not entitled to voteDr. med. Dipl.-Chem. Herbert LichtneckerNot 
specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot 
specifiedClassification: not possible; consequence: not entitled to voteDr. med. 
Thomas Lob-CorziliusNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder GPAUClassification: no IC; 
Consequence: noneNorbert MülleneisenNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder 
DGPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneProf. Dr. med. Dennis 
NowakNoNoYesNoNoNoDGAUM and DGP elected representativesClassification: low IC; 
consequence: no management function (coordination/AG management)Dr. med. Uta 
RabeNoNoYesNoNoNoMandate holder AeDAClassification: low IC; consequence: no 
management function (coordination/AG management)Prof. Dr. rer. nat. Monika 
RaulfNoNoYesNoNoNoMandate holder DGAKI and DGAUMClassification: low IC; 
consequence: no management function (coordination/AG management)Prof. Dr. med. 
Jörg SteinmannNoNoYesNoNoNoNoClassification: low IC; consequence: no management 
function (coordination/AG management)Prof. Dr. med. Jens-Oliver 
SteißNoNoYesNoNoNoMandate holder BAPPClassification: low IC; consequence: no 
management function (coordination/AG management)Dr. med. Jannik 
StemlerNoNoYesNoNoNoNoClassification: low IC; consequence: no management 
function (coordination/AG management)Dr. med. Ulli UmpfenbachNoNoNoNoNoNoBoard 
member BAPP, WAPPA, AGAS, FAAKClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. 
nat. Kerttu ValtanenNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot 
specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedClassification: not possible; consequence: 
not entitled to voteDr. rer. nat. Sandra Walser-ReichenbachNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate 
holder GHUPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. medic. Barbora 
WerchanNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneProf. Dr. med. 
Gerhard A. WiesmüllerNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder and Board member 
GHUPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneProf. Dr. med. Birgit 
WillingerNoYesYesNoNoNoMandate holder DMykGClassification: low IC; consequence: 
no management function (coordination/AG management)


6. Postepy Dermatol Alergol. 2023 Dec;40(6):762-765. doi:
10.5114/ada.2023.133819.  Epub 2024 Jan 8.

Prevalence of major food allergens in skincare products for atopic dermatitis.

Ryczaj K(1), Chojnowska-Wójtowicz M(1), Dumycz K(1)(2), Feleszko W(1), Kulus 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Pneumonology and Allergy, Medical University of 
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Doctoral School, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.

INTRODUCTION: Food allergy is a common concomitant disease in patients with 
atopic dermatitis. Sensitisation and subsequent development of food allergy 
might result from the application of skincare products containing food 
allergens, particularly when the skin barrier is impaired and inflamed. 
Emollients are the mainstay of the management of atopic dermatitis; however, the 
prevalence of food allergens in skincare products used for atopic dermatitis is 
unknown.
AIM: To analyse the prevalence of major food allergens in skincare products for 
atopic dermatitis.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Three major online cosmetic retailers in Poland were 
screened for atopic skincare products. The major food allergens under the 
mandatory allergen labelling regulation of the European Union were searched for 
using the INCI nomenclature of cosmetics ingredients.
RESULTS: We screened 396 skincare products, out of which 127 (32.1%) products 
contained at least one derivative of a major food allergen. The most common 
allergens were almonds, macadamia nuts, soya and cereals, followed by sesame and 
milk. There was no significant difference in the presence of food derivatives 
between leave-on and rinse-off skincare products, as well as between those 
intended for use by infants and children, and adults only.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis revealed that major food allergens are prevalent in 
skincare products for eczema. Applying skincare products containing food 
derivatives on affected and inflamed skin can promote percutaneous 
sensitisation. Therefore, clinicians and patients with atopic dermatitis must be 
careful of products used for treating eczema that may contain derivatives of a 
major food allergen.

Copyright: © 2023 Termedia Sp. z o. o.

DOI: 10.5114/ada.2023.133819
PMCID: PMC10809837
PMID: 38282883

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


7. J Allergy Clin Immunol Glob. 2023 Sep 14;2(4):100168. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacig.2023.100168. eCollection 2023 Nov.

Jug r 1 sensitization in 0- to 35-month-old children with egg, milk, or wheat 
sensitization.

Kitamura K(1), Matsui T(1), Takasato Y(1), Sugiura S(1), Ito K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Aichi Children's Health and Medical Center, Allergy and Immunology Center, 
Obu, Japan.
(2)Comprehensive Pediatric Medicine, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Obu, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of tree nut allergies in children is increasing, with 
walnut allergy being the most common in the United States and Japan. Allergic 
reactions, including anaphylaxis, frequently occur at the first intake of tree 
nuts, suggesting prior sensitization.
OBJECTIVE: Our aim was to identify which children should be considered for 
workup for preexisting sensitization.
METHODS: Juglans regia (Jug r) 1-specific IgE screening for 0- to 35-month-old 
children who had a positive specific IgE result for egg white, milk, or wheat 
and had never ingested walnuts was conducted at a food allergy referral hospital 
between November 2018 and December 2022. Clinical data regarding age; sex; 
allergic disease complications; and egg, milk, or wheat allergy were examined 
retrospectively.
RESULTS: The rate of Jug r 1-specific IgE positivity (level > 0.34 kUA/L) of 205 
children (125 of whom were boys) was 9.8%, with a median Jug r 1-specific IgE 
level of 12.5 kUA/L in patients with a positive test result. Eczema was observed 
in 119 patients (58%). The rate of Jug r 1-specific IgE positivity was 
significantly higher in the eczema-positive group (15.1% [18 of 119]) than in 
the eczema-negative group (2.3% [2 of 86]) (P = .002). In the eczema-positive 
group, the rates of Jug r 1-specific IgE positivity per sensitized antigen were 
13.7% for egg, 17.0% for milk, and 17.1% for wheat. The rate of Jug r 1-specific 
IgE positivity was significantly higher in the group with severe eczema (26.6% 
[17 of 64]) than in the group with nonsevere eczema (1.8% [1 of 55]) (P < .001).
CONCLUSION: Even in children younger than 3 years, 15% of children with eczema 
and egg, milk, or wheat sensitization were sensitized to Jug r 1.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacig.2023.100168
PMCID: PMC10679771
PMID: 38024848


8. BMJ Open. 2023 Nov 16;13(11):e074168. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2023-074168.

Development of peanut, sesame and tree nut allergy in Polish children at high 
risk of food allergy: a protocol for a cross-sectional study.

Ryczaj K(1), Szczukocka-Zych A(2), Wawszczak M(2), Gawryjołek J(3), Krogulska 
A(3), Krawiec M(4)(5), Horvath A(6), Szajewska H(6), Santos A(4)(5)(7), Bahnson 
HT(8), Kulus M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Pneumonology and Allergy, Medical University of 
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland klaudia.ryczaj@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Paediatric Pneumonology and Allergy, Medical University of 
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, Allergy and Gastroenterology, Ludwik Rydygier 
Collegium Medicum in Bydgoszcz, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Toruń, 
Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(4)Children's Allergy Service, Evelina London Children's Hospital, Guy's and St 
Thomas' Hospital, London, UK.
(5)Department of Women and Children's Health (Pediatric Allergy), School of Life 
Course Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, King's College London, 
London, UK.
(6)Department of Paediatrics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(7)Peter Gorer Department of Immunobiology, School of Immunology and Microbial 
Sciences, King's College London, London, UK.
(8)Benaroya Research Institute and the Immune Tolerance Network, Seattle, 
Washington, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Peanut allergies cause serious health problems worldwide. A strong 
finding has shown that the early introduction of peanuts into the diet of 
infants at high risk of food allergy reduces the prevalence of peanut allergy. 
Allergies to peanuts, sesame and tree nuts have been shown to coexist in 60% of 
cases and vary according to geographical location and dietary habits. Insights 
into the prevalence of nut and seed allergies in societies with varying 
consumption levels are essential for developing population-specific weaning 
guidelines. Understanding the age at which peanut allergy develops is paramount 
for successful early introduction strategies.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: We will perform a cross-sectional study at two tertiary 
allergy centres in Warsaw and Bydgoszcz. Two hundred forty children aged 4-36 
months with eczema or egg allergy will undergo an extensive assessment of their 
peanut, sesame and tree nut allergy status through skin testing, specific IgE 
measurements and oral food challenges. The primary outcome is the prevalence of 
peanut, sesame and tree nut allergies in Polish children at high risk of food 
allergy. Additionally, the timing of the development of peanut, sesame and tree 
nut allergies in the first 3 years of life in a high-risk population will be 
assessed.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The Ethics Committee of the Medical University of 
Warsaw, Poland approved this protocol (KB/86/2021). The results of this study 
will be submitted to a peer-reviewed journal no later than 1 year after data 
collection. The abstract will be presented at relevant national and 
international conferences.Although the authors may be able to commit to journal 
submission no later than 1 year after data collection, publication dates remain 
beyond their control.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT05662800.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2023-074168
PMCID: PMC10660920
PMID: 37973545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: HS has participated as a 
clinical investigator, and/or advisory board member, and/or consultant, and/or 
speaker for: Danone, Nestlé/Nestlé Nutrition Institute and Reckitt/Mead Johnson.


9. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2024 Feb;153(2):461-470. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2023.08.037. Epub 2023 Oct 7.

Revised Swedish infant feeding guidelines are associated with earlier 
introduction of allergenic foods.

Österlund J(1), Granåsen G(2), Bodén S(3), Silfverdal SA(3), Domellöf M(3), 
Winberg A(3), West CE(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Pediatrics, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden. 
Electronic address: jonas.osterlund@umu.se.
(2)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå University, Umeå, 
Sweden.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences, Pediatrics, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Randomized controlled trials have demonstrated that early 
introduction of allergenic foods, such as peanut and egg, can reduce food 
allergy in high-risk children. Many international guidelines recommend 
introduction of allergenic foods in the first year of life, and accordingly, the 
Swedish National Food agency released updated guidelines in June 2019.
OBJECTIVE: Our aim was to examine whether the age at introduction and 
consumption frequency of allergenic foods have changed since release of the 
revised national guidelines on the introduction of solid foods in Sweden.
METHODS: Children born between June 2016 and December 2018 (n = 1925) were 
compared with children born between June 2019 and April 2021 (n = 1761) by using 
data from the NorthPop Birth Cohort study. Data on food introduction, eczema, 
and food allergy were prospectively collected until age 18 months by using 
web-based questionnaires. IgE sensitization was assessed at 18 age months.
RESULTS: The proportion of participants who had been introduced to egg, legume, 
soy products, peanut, almond, and cashew nut during the first year of life 
increased after implementation of the revised national guidelines. The most 
significant changes were seen for legume (from 55.2% to 69.8% [adjusted odds 
ratio = 1.90 (95% CI = 1.62-2.24)]) and peanut (from 29.2% to 43.2% adjusted 
odds ratio = 1.87 (95% CI = 1.55-2.24)]); consumption frequency had also 
increased. No differences in the prevalence of eczema, food allergy, or 
sensitization to the foods of interest were found.
CONCLUSION: Since release of the revised guidelines, infants in the general 
population are introduced to and consume a variety of allergenic foods earlier 
and more frequently; however, early manifestations of allergic disease have 
remained unchanged.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2023.08.037
PMID: 37813287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Am Fam Physician. 2023 Aug;108(2):159-165.

Food Allergies: Diagnosis, Treatment, and Prevention.

Bright DM(1), Stegall HL(1), Slawson DC(1).

Author information:
(1)Atrium Health Carolinas Medical Center Family Medicine and Wake Forest School 
of Medicine, Charlotte, North Carolina.

In the United States, approximately 2% to 3% of adults and 8% of children have a 
food allergy. Allergic reactions range from minor pruritus to life-threatening 
anaphylaxis. These allergies often lead to significant anxiety and costs for 
patients and caregivers. Common food allergies include peanuts, cow's milk, 
shellfish, tree nuts, egg, fish, soy, and wheat. Peanut allergy, the most 
common, is the leading cause of life-threatening anaphylaxis. Children with 
asthma, allergic rhinitis, atopic dermatitis, or an allergy to insect venom, 
medications, or latex are at an increased risk of developing food allergies. 
Diagnosis of food allergy starts with a detailed, allergy-focused history. Serum 
immunoglobulin E and skin prick testing provide reliable information regarding 
food allergy diagnoses. Primary treatment involves elimination of the offending 
food from the diet. Prevention strategies proven to decrease the risk of 
developing a food allergy include restricting exposure to cow's milk in the 
first three days of life and early sequential exposure to allergenic foods 
starting between four and six months of age. Exclusive breastfeeding for three 
to four months reduces the likelihood of developing eczema and asthma but does 
not reduce development of food allergies. Most children eventually outgrow 
allergies to cow's milk, egg, soy, and wheat. However, allergies to tree nuts, 
peanuts, and shellfish are more likely to be lifelong.

PMID: 37590855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]