1. Clin Nutr. 2025 May;48:134-143. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2025.03.026. Epub 2025 Apr
 5.

Long term impact of formula choice in children with cow milk protein allergy: 
6-year follow-up of the Atopic March Cohort Study.

Nocerino R(1), Bedogni G(2), Carucci L(3), Aquilone G(4), Oglio F(3), Coppola 
S(3), Masino A(3), Berni Canani R(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medical Science, University of Naples "Federico 
II", Naples, Italy; ImmunoNutritionLab at CEINGE Advanced Biotechnologies, 
University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy; Department of Biomedicine and 
Prevention, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy. Electronic address: 
rita.nocerino@unina.it.
(2)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Alma Mater Studiorum-University 
of Bologna, Bologna, Italy; Department of Primary Health Care, Internal Medicine 
Unit addressed to Frailty and Aging, "S. Maria delle Croci" Hospital, AUSL 
Romagna, Ravenna, Italy.
(3)Department of Translational Medical Science, University of Naples "Federico 
II", Naples, Italy; ImmunoNutritionLab at CEINGE Advanced Biotechnologies, 
University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Translational Medical Science, University of Naples "Federico 
II", Naples, Italy.
(5)Department of Translational Medical Science, University of Naples "Federico 
II", Naples, Italy; ImmunoNutritionLab at CEINGE Advanced Biotechnologies, 
University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy; European Laboratory for the 
Investigation of Food-Induced Diseases, University of Naples "Federico II", 
Naples, Italy; Task Force for Microbiome Studies, University of Naples "Federico 
II", Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Cow's milk protein allergy (CMPA) is a significant health 
issue in the pediatric age, carrying lifelong health implications. To compare 
the impact of different formulas on the occurrence of other atopic 
manifestations (AMs), autoimmune disorders (ADs) and the time of immune 
tolerance acquisition in a population of children with immunoglobulin E 
(IgE)-mediated cow CMPA.
METHODS: In a 72-month prospective cohort study the occurrence of other AMs 
(i.e., eczema, urticaria, asthma, and rhinoconjunctivitis), ADs (i.e., celiac 
disease, thyroiditis, type 1 diabetes, inflammatory bowel diseases, idiopathic 
juvenile arthritis) and the time of immune tolerance acquisition were 
comparatively evaluated in IgE-mediated CMPA children treated with different 
formulas: extensively hydrolyzed casein formula containing the probiotic 
L. rhamnosus G (EHCF + LGG), rice hydrolyzed formula (RHF), soy formula (SF), 
extensively hydrolyzed whey formula (EHWF), or amino-acid based formula (AAF).
RESULTS: 313 subjects were evaluated: EHCF + LGG (n = 64), RHF(n = 62), 
SF(n = 63), EHWF(n = 60) and AAF (n = 64). The incidence of AMs was: 
0.30(Bonferroni-corrected 95%CI 0.15 to 0.44) for EHCF + LGG cohort, 0.68 
(0.52-0.83) for RHF cohort, 0.73 (0.59-0.87) for SF cohort, 0.70 (0.55-0.85) for 
EHWF cohort and 0.83 (0.71-0.95) for AAF cohort. The corresponding risk ratios 
are 2.28 (1.51-3.45) for RHF vs. EHCF + LGG (p < 0.001), 2.46 (1.64-3.69) for SF 
vs. EHCF + LGG (p < 0.001), 2.36 (1.56-3.56) for EHWF vs. EHCF + LGG 
(p < 0.001), and 2.79 (1.88-4.13) for AAF vs. EHCF + LGG (p < 0.001). The 
72-month immune tolerance acquisition rate was higher in the EHCF + LGG cohort. 
The incidence of celiac disease was 2/313 (0.006, binomial exact 95%CI 0.0007 to 
0.023). No cases of other ADs were reported.
CONCLUSION: The dietary treatment with EHCF + LGG is associated with lower 
incidence of AMs and higher rate of immune tolerance acquisition in children 
with CMPA.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clnu.2025.03.026
PMID: 40209535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest Roberto Berni Canani have 
had the following relevant financial relationships with the following 
manufacturers: Biostime (research grant), Ch. Hansen (research grant, speaker), 
DBV (research grant), Dr. Schar (research grant), Humana (research grant), 
iHealth (research grant), Kraft-Heinz (research grant, speaker), Mead Johnson 
Nutrition (research grant, speaker), Nestlè (research grant, speaker), Novalac 
(research grant, speaker), Nutricia (research grant, speaker), Sanofi (research 
grant, speaker) as part of publicly funded research projects with the support of 
the Italian Ministry of Health, the Italian Ministry of the University and 
Research, and the EU. The other authors declared that they have no conflicts of 
interest.


2. Pediatr Dermatol. 2025 Mar-Apr;42(2):259-266. doi: 10.1111/pde.15807. Epub
2024  Nov 11.

Food Allergy Test-Guided Dietary Advice for Children With Atopic Dermatitis: A 
Consensus Study.

Garside L(1), Boyle R(2), Meyer R(3)(4), Skypala I(5), Allen H(6), Beattie P(7), 
Dempsey J(8), Doyle M(9), Evans-Howells H(10), Feeney M(1)(11), Ludman S(12), 
Marrs T(5), Ravenscroft J(13), Stiefel G(14), Umasunthar T(15), Vyas D(16), 
Yerlett N(17), Walsh J(18), Brown SJ(19), Ridd MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Applied Excellence in Skin & Allergy Research, University of 
Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(2)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(3)Winchester University, Winchester, UK.
(4)KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(6)Imperial College London, London, UK.
(7)Royal Hospital for Children, Glasgow, UK.
(8)Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK.
(9)Jersey Allergy Clinic, St Lawrence, Jersey, UK.
(10)Dr Helen Allergy, Bournemouth, UK.
(11)King's College London, London, UK.
(12)Royal Devon University Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, UK.
(13)Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, UK.
(14)University Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust, Leicester, UK.
(15)Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, UK.
(16)West Hertfordshire Hospitals NHS Trust, Watford, UK.
(17)Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(18)Castle Partnership, Norwich, UK.
(19)University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

BACKGROUND: The use of blood specific IgE or skin prick tests (SPT) to guide 
dietary exclusions for disease control in children with atopic dermatitis (AD) 
is controversial. We undertook a consensus exercise on how to interpret SPT 
results and dietary history for cow's milk, hen's egg, wheat, and soy in 
children < 2 years old with AD.
METHODS: Fourteen clinicians from general practice, pediatrics, pediatric 
dermatology, pediatric allergy, and pediatric dietetics from UK and Ireland took 
part in an online modified Delphi study. Over three rounds, participants gave 
their anonymous opinions and received individualized and group feedback, based 
on the premise that all children had SPTs. The findings were discussed in an 
online workshop.
RESULTS: Of 18 symptoms, 12 were identified as relevant to immediate and 7 to 
delayed allergy. Regarding SPTs, there was consensus over which allergens to use 
for wheat and soy but not cow's milk or hen's egg; for all study foods, wheal 
size was determined as 0-1 mm negative, ≥ 5 mm sensitized, but between 2 and 
4 mm, categorization varied by food. During the final workshop, consensus was 
reached on dietary advice for nine combinations of SPT results and dietary 
history.
CONCLUSION: We attained consensus on how SPTs and dietary history for four 
common food allergens should be interpreted in young children under 2 years of 
age with AD. These pragmatic recommendations may support clinician education, 
consistency of decision-making, and future research.

© 2024 The Author(s). Pediatric Dermatology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/pde.15807
PMCID: PMC11950804
PMID: 39528241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.W. has sat on clinical advisory panels to 
Allergy UK and Anaphylaxis UK. G.S. acts as Trustee to Allergy UK, contributed 
to an educational video on atopic dermatitis with Sanofi and is Principal 
Investigator for NARF study. R.M. is on the advisory panel of CoMISS supported 
by Nestle Health Science, has provided consultancy to Else Nutrition, and 
received honoraria for lectures from Nutricia/Danone, Abbott, and Reckitt 
Benckiser. I.S. has received honoraria for lectures from ThermoFisher, Royal 
College of GPs, TouchiME. M.J.R. is chief investigator on the TIGER (Trial of 
IgE food allergy tests for Eczema Relief) study (NIHR133464). S.J.B. has 
received research funding (but no personal financial benefits) from the Wellcome 
Trust (220875/Z/20/Z), UKRI, Medical Research Council, Rosetrees Trust, 
Stoneygates Trust, British Skin Foundation, Charles Wolfson Charitable Trust, 
anonymous donations from people with eczema, Unilever, Pfizer, Abbvie, 
Sosei‐Heptares, Janssen, European Lead Factory (multiple industry partners) and 
the BIOMAP consortium (EC‐IMI project ref. No 821511).


3. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2024 Dec;281(12):6261-6266. doi: 
10.1007/s00405-024-08835-2. Epub 2024 Jul 23.

Bacterial biofilm formation on headpieces of Cochlear implants.

Kirchhoff L(1), Arweiler-Harbeck D(2), Meyer M(2), Buer J(1), Lang S(2), 
Steinmann J(1)(3), Bertram R(3), Deuss E(2), Höing B(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, University Hospital Essen, University 
Duisburg- Essen, Essen, Germany.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital 
Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstrasse 55, 45147, Essen, Essen, 
Germany.
(3)Institute of Clinical Hygiene, Medical Microbiology and Clinical 
Infectiology, Paracelsus Medical University, Klinikum Nuremberg, Nuremberg, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital 
Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstrasse 55, 45147, Essen, Essen, 
Germany. benedikt.hoeing@uk-essen.de.

INTRODUCTION: Bacterial biofilm formation on medical devices, such as Cochlear 
implants (CI), can lead to chronic infections. Not only the inner parts of the 
implant but also the externally located headpiece might be associated with 
prolonged superficial skin eczema resulting in the inability of wearing the 
headpiece. In this study, the surface of three CI headpieces from different 
manufacturers were examined for bacterial biofilm formation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two bacterial species associated with implant-related 
infections were tested: Pseudomonas aeruginosa (ATCC9027) and Staphylococcus 
aureus (ATCC6538). Biofilms were formed over 24 h in tryptic soy broth at 36 °C. 
Biofilm formation was detected in form of biomass measurement by crystal violet 
staining. CI headpiece dummies of three manufacturers were used.
RESULTS: Both tested bacterial species formed biofilms on the examined CI 
headpiece-surfaces in a species-dependent manner with higher biofilm formation 
of P. aeruginosa. For both, S. aureus and P. aeruginosa, biofilm formation on 
the CI components was comparable to a polystyrene control surface. Between the 
three manufacturers, no significant difference in biofilm formation was found.
DISCUSSION: The tested bacteria displayed biofilm formation on the CI headpieces 
in a species-specific manner with higher amount of biofilm formed by P. 
aeruginosa. The biofilm formation was comparable between the manufacturers. In 
this study, an enhanced biofilm formation on CI headpieces could not be 
demonstrated. These in vitro tests suggest a minor role of bacterial biofilm on 
the CI headpiece in skin infections under the CI headpiece.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-024-08835-2
PMID: 39042175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Conflict of interest The study was 
conducted with materials supplied by the following companies (named 
alphabetically): Advanced Bionics®, Cochlear®, MedEl®. Author’s note The 
materials in the final device (Cochlear implant) might differ from the 
components supplied by the companies in the allergy kits.


4. Allergol Select. 2024 May 3;8:90-198. doi: 10.5414/ALX02444E. eCollection
2024.

AWMF mold guideline "Medical clinical diagnostics for indoor mold exposure" - 
Update 2023 AWMF Register No. 161/001.

Hurraß J(1)(2)(3), Heinzow B(4)(2), Walser-Reichenbach S(4)(2)(3), Aurbach 
U(5)(6)(2), Becker S(7)(2), Bellmann R(8)(2), Bergmann KC(9)(2)(3), Cornely 
OA(10)(2), Engelhart S(11)(2)(3), Fischer G(12)(2), Gabrio T(13)(2), Herr 
CEW(14)(15)(2)(3), Joest M(16)(2), Karagiannidis C(17)(18)(2), Klimek 
L(19)(2)(3), Köberle M(20)(2)(3), Kolk A(21)(2), Lichtnecker H(22)(2), 
Lob-Corzilius T(23)(2)(3), Mülleneisen N(24)(2)(3), Nowak D(25)(2)(3), Rabe 
U(26)(2)(3), Raulf M(27)(2)(3), Steinmann J(28)(2), Steiß JO(29)(30)(2)(3), 
Stemler J(10)(2), Umpfenbach U(31)(2), Valtanen K(32)(2), Werchan B(33)(2), 
Willinger B(34)(2)(3), Wiesmüller GA(5)(6)(35)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Section for Hygiene in Healthcare Facilities, Division of Infection Control 
and Environmental Hygiene, Cologne Health Department, Cologne.
(2)Co-author.
(3)Member of a scientific medical society, a society or a medical association 
with voting rights.
(4)Formerly: State Agency for Social Services (LAsD) Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel.
(5)Laboratory Dr. Wisplinghoff.
(6)ZfMK - Center for Environment, Hygiene and Mycology Cologne, Cologne.
(7)Department for Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical 
Center Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine I, Medical University of Innsbruck, 
Innsbruck, Austria.
(9)Institute of Allergology Charité, Charité - University Medicine Berlin, 
Berlin.
(10)Institute for Translational Research, CECAD Cluster of Excellence, 
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany and Department I for Internal Medicine, 
Cologne University Hospital, Cologne.
(11)Institute for Hygiene and Public Health, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn.
(12)Baden-Württemberg State Health Office in the Stuttgart Regional Council, 
Stuttgart.
(13)Formerly: Baden-Württemberg State Health Office in the Stuttgart Regional 
Council, Stuttgart.
(14)Bavarian Health and Food Safety Authority, Munich.
(15)Environmental Health and Prevention, Institute and Polyclinic for 
Occupational, Social and Environmental Medicine, University of Munich Hospital 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich.
(16)Allergological-Immunological Laboratory, Helios Lung and Allergy Center 
Bonn, Bonn.
(17)Faculty of Health, Professorship for Extracorporeal Lung Replacement 
Procedures, University of Witten/Herdecke, Witten/Herdecke.
(18)Lung Clinic Cologne Merheim, Clinics of the City of Cologne, Cologne.
(19)Center for Rhinology and Allergology, Wiesbaden.
(20)Department of Dermatology and Allergy Biederstein, School of Medicine, 
Technical University of Munich, Munich.
(21)Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (IFA) of the German Social 
Accident Insurance (DGUV), Unit Biological Agents, Sankt Augustin.
(22)Medical Institute for Environmental and Occupational Medicine MIU GmbH 
Erkrath, Erkrath.
(23)Scientific working group of environmental medicine of the German Society of 
Pediatric Allergology (GPAU).
(24)Asthma and Allergy Center Leverkusen, Leverkusen.
(25)Institute and Polyclinic for Occupational, Social and Environmental 
Medicine, member of the German Center for Lung Research, Hospital of the 
University of Munich, Munich.
(26)Center for Allergology and Asthma, Johanniter Hospital Treuenbrietzen, 
Treuenbrietzen.
(27)Institute for Prevention and Occupational Medicine of the German Statutory 
Accident Insurance, Institute of the Ruhr University Bochum (IPA), Bochum.
(28)Center for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Giessen 
and Marburg GmbH, Giessen.
(29)Specialized Practice in Allergology and Pediatric Pulmonology in Fulda, 
Fulda.
(30)Institute for Clinical Hygiene, Medical Microbiology and Clinical 
Infectiology, Paracelsus Private Medical University Nuremberg Clinic, Nuremberg.
(31)Doctor for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Pediatric Pulmonology, 
Environmental Medicine, Classical Homeopathy, Asthma Trainer, Neurodermatitis 
Trainer, Viersen.
(32)FG II 1.4 Microbiological Risks, German Environment Agency, Berlin.
(33)German Pollen Information Service Foundation (PID), Berlin, Germany.
(34)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Clinical Microbiology - 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, and.
(35)Institute for Occupational, Social and Environmental Medicine, Uniclinic 
RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany.

None.

© Dustri-Verlag Dr. K. Feistle.

DOI: 10.5414/ALX02444E
PMCID: PMC11097193
PMID: 38756207

Conflict of interest statement: See Table 14. Figure 1Incubation period [775, 
778].Figure 2Temporal relationship between sensitization and first allergic 
reaction [775, 778].Figure 3Latency period [775, 778]. Figure 4Annual course of 
the occurrence of mold spores in the outdoor air, spore concentrations as weekly 
values in spores/m3 air, pollen trap in Leverkusen. Source: Mülleneisen 2023, 
unpublished data. A volumetric spore trap based on the Hirst principle was used 
to determine the concentration [269] with associated microscopic analysis of the 
samples. The measurement method is standardized [738].Figure 5Monthly course of 
spore concentrations (in spores/m3 of air) in the outdoor air for several mold 
genera as an example for one year and one measuring station in Germany: a) 
Pleospora 2021 – Berlin measuring station, b) Cladosporium 2021 – Chemnitz 
measuring station, c) Alternaria 2021 – Berlin measuring station, d) Epicoccum 
2021 – Berlin measuring station. Missing data at the Chemnitz station in the 
periods: February 24, 2021 to March 1, 2021 and April 1, 2021 to April 6, 2021. 
The figure was provided by the German Pollen Information Service Foundation 
(Stiftung Deutscher Polleninformationsdienst). The concentration was determined 
using volumetric spore traps based on the Hirst principle [269] followed by 
microscopic analysis of the samples. The measurement procedure is standardized 
[738].Risk matrix 1. Risk of infection by mold (The darker a box, the greater 
the possible health risk.). Risk matrix 2.Risk of sensitization/risk of allergy 
caused by mold (the darker the color, the greater the possible health risk). 
*Proof of the clinical relevance of a sensitization determined in the allergy 
test required! Table 2.Important sources of frequently occurring mold species 
and genera (examples from practical investigations). Species or genusImportant 
sourcesCladosporium herbarum, Alternaria alternata, Botrytis cinereaVegetation, 
outdoor air-associatedAspergillus versicolor complex and Scopulariopsis 
brevicaulisDamp plasterXerophilic Aspergillus species of the Restrictus complex 
(esp. A. penicillioides and A. restrictus) as well as Aspergillus 
glaucus/pseudoglaucus and A. montevidensis, Wallemia sebiCellulose-containing 
materials with only slightly increased moistureAspergillus fumigatusComposting, 
rotting of plant material, indicator for thermotolerant processesChaetomium 
spp., Trichoderma spp., Phialophora spp.Colonizer of damp wood and cellulose 
materials such as cardboardPenicillium speciesPerishable food, waste, organic 
waste and wallpaper, house dustSarocladium strictum, Parengyodontium album, 
Lecanicillium psalliotae and Simplicillium spp.Polystyrene floor insulation with 
prolonged moisture penetrationStachybotrys chartarum, Acremonium spp, Chaetomium 
spp.Very moist, cellulose-containing building materialsWallemia sebi, 
Aspergillus restrictus complexKeeping caged animals with bedding Table 
3.Examples of species complexes based on molecular analyses (modified according 
to [297]). Complex or groupSelected speciesMolecular markers for 
differentiationAspergillus versicolor complexA. versicolor, A. amoenus, A. 
creber, A. jensenii, A. protuberus, et al.CaM, β-TubAspergillus niger complexA. 
niger, A. acidus, A. aculeatus, A. brasiliensis, A. tubingensis, et al.CaM, 
β-TubAspergillus fumigatus complexA. fumigatus, A. lentulus, A. novofumigatus, 
A. fumigatiaffinis, et al.CaM, β-Tub (Note: Cultivation at 37 °C; 
Differentiation A. lentulus)Fusarium solani complexF. solani, F. 
keratoplasticum, F. petroliphilum, F. lichenicola, et al.EF-1α, RPB-1 and/or 
RPB-2 Table 4.Evidence for the relationship between indoor moisture/mold 
exposure and disease (in alphabetical order), modified from [7, 39, 45, 58, 59, 
74, 78, 79, 80, 101, 108,111, 116, 119, 131, 133, 162, 169, 175, 181, 182, 183, 
201, 202, 204, 211, 212, 245, 263, 273, 275, 287, 289, 291, 298, 303, 316, 319, 
322, 338, 363, 370, 394, 437, 442, 444, 445, 449, 450, 451, 462, 465, 466, 467, 
490, 499, 501, 504, 509, 514, 520, 521, 522, 525, 526, 528, 532, 534, 537, 540, 
546, 547, 552, 553, 568, 569, 596, 598, 632, 635, 642, 643, 644, 645, 652, 655, 
694, 698, 717, 722, 742, 746, 754, 756, 757, 777, 783, 790, 791, 794, 797]. 
Causal relationship Sufficient evidence for an association1Allergic 
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) Allergic bronchopulmonary mycoses (ABPM) 
Allergic respiratory diseases Allergic rhinitis Allergic rhinoconjunctivitis 
Aspergilloma Aspergillosis Aspergillus bronchitis Asthma (manifestation, 
progression, exacerbation) Bronchitis (acute, chronic) Community-acquired 
aspergillus pneumonia Favoring respiratory infections Hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis (HP); extrinsic allergic alveolitis (EAA) Invasive aspergillosis 
Mycoses Organic dust toxic syndrome (ODTS) (workplace) Pulmonary aspergillosis 
(subacute, chronic) Rhinosinusitis (acute, chronic invasive or granulomatous, 
allergic)Limited or suspected evidence of an associationAtopic eczema / atopic 
dermatitis / neurodermatitis (manifestation) Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) Mood disorders Mucous membrane irritation (MMI) Odor effects 
SarcoidosisInadequate or insufficient evidence for an associationAcute 
idiopathic pulmonary hemorrhage in children Airborne mycotoxicosis Arthritis 
Autoimmune diseases Cancer Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) Endocrinopathies 
Gastrointestinal effects Multiple Chemical Sensitivity (MCS) Multiple sclerosis 
Neuropsychological effects Neurotoxic effects Sudden infant death syndrome Renal 
effects Reproductive disorders Rheumatism Sick building syndrome (SBS) 
Teratogenicity Thyroid diseases Urticaria 1The diseases listed here can be 
subsumed under the term Building Related Illness (BRI), even though BRI requires 
that the etiology, pathology, pathophysiology, diagnosis, treatment, prevention 
and prognosis are clearly known [429, 663]. Table 5.Examples of typical antigens 
and antigen sources for hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP; extrinsic allergic 
alveolitis (EAA) (mod. after Costabel et al. 2020 [113]). AntigenAntigen 
sourceHP typeBacteria   Thermophilic actinomycetesMoldy hay and straw Farmer’s 
lungSugar cane dustBagassosis   Klebsiella oxytocaHumidifierHumidifier lung 
Mycobacteria   Mycobacterium avium complexWhirlpoolsWhirlpool lung (hot tub 
lung)   Mycobacterium immunogenumCooling lubricantsMachinist’s 
lungMushrooms   Absidia corymbiferaMoldy hay and straw Farmer’s 
lung   Trichosporon cutaneumInteriorsSummer-type alveolitis   Penicillium 
roquefortiCheese production/industrial sourcesCheese washer lung 
   Purpureocillium lilacinum, Aspergillus spp. Wind instrumentsWind instrument 
alveolitisAnimal proteins   Feathers and excrementBirdsBird keeper lung   Serum 
and urineRatsRat protein alveolitisPlant proteins   Nut dustTiger nutsTigernut 
alveolitis   Soy dustSoy productsSoy dust alveolitis   Wood dustVarious wood 
dustsWoodworker’s alveolitisEnzymes   PhytaseAnimal feed productionPhytase 
alveolitis   Enzymes from Bacillus subtilisBiological cleaning agentDetergent 
lung Table 6.Diagnostic criteria for allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. a) 
Diagnostic criteria for allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis according to 
Rosenberg et al. [586]:Main criteria:   1. Bronchial asthma    2. Positive 
immediate reaction in the skin test for Aspergillus fumigatus   3. Total IgE > 
417 IU/mL   4. Positive specific IgE against Aspergillus fumigatus   5. IgG 
antibodies against Aspergillus fumigatus   6. Blood eosinophilia (> 1,000 
Eos/µL)   7. Central bronchiectasis   8. Radiological volatile or permanent 
pulmonary infiltratesSecondary criteria   Tough mucus plugs   Positive sputum 
culture for Aspergillus fumigatus   Late reaction in the intradermal test for 
Aspergillus fumigatusb) Modified ISHAM diagnostic criteria for allergic 
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis 2021 [616]:Combination of criteria with best 
sensitivity/specificity:   1. Bronchial asthma   2. Aspergillus 
fumigatus-specific IgE > 0.35 kU/L   3. Total IgE > 500 IU/mLand at least two of 
the following criteria:   1. Aspergillus fumigatus-specific IgG > 27 mgA/dL   2. 
Bronchiectasis in CT thorax   3. Eosinophilia in the blood count > 500/µL Table 
7.Mold mycoses and their pathogens [712]. Infectious disease (invasive 
mycosis)Pathogen (risk group according. TRBA 460 (2016) [712]AspergillosisA. 
fumigatus (2)A. flavus (2)A. niger (complex) (1, 2)A. terreus (2)A. nidulans 
(1)MucormycosisRhizopus oryzae (2)Mucor sp. (1)Rhizomucor 
(1)PhaeohyphomycosesCurvularia sp. (1)Bipolaris sp. (1)Alternaria sp. 
(1)HyalohyphomycosesFusarium sp. (1, 2)Pseudallescheria sp.= Scedosporium sp. 
(2)PenicilliosesTalaromyces (formerly Penicillium) marneffei (2) Table 
8.Differential diagnosis of extrinsic allergic alveolitis (EAA) and organic dust 
toxic syndrome (ODTS) [354]. FeaturesEAAODTSExposureVarious allergensEndotoxins, 
high exposureIncidence2 – 30 / 10,00010 – 100 / 10,000Latency4 – 8 hours4 – 12 
hoursAuscultationEnd-expiratory rales on both sides basalNormal, possibly 
rattling noisesLung functionRestriction (rarely obstruction, DLCO reducedNormal 
(possible restriction)PrecipitinsOften specific IgGMostly negative Table 
9.Immunosuppression risk groups of the Commission for Hospital Hygiene and 
Infection Prevention (KRINKO) at the Robert Koch Institute [349]. Risk group 1 
(moderate immunosuppression/deficiency)– Granulocytopenia < 0.5 × 109 /L; (< 
500/µL) probably up to 10 days (analogous to leukopenia < 1 × 109 /L; < 
1,000/µL), – Autologous stem cell transplantation up to 3 months after day 0 
(day of stem cell return) – Lack of CD4-positive T helper cells < 200/µL 
(Caveat: age-appropriate normal values in children) – Autologous stem cell 
transplantation up to 3 months after intensive therapy phase Patients who have 
more than one characteristic of the immunosuppression/deficiency listed under 
risk group 1 are assigned to risk group 2.Risk group 2 (severe 
immunosuppression/deficiency)– Granulocytopenia < 0.5 × 109 /L (< 500/μL) for 
more than 10 days (analogous to leukopenia < 1× 109 /L; < 1,000/μL) – Severe 
aplastic anemia or macrophage activation syndrome during intensive 
immunosuppressive therapy – Allogeneic bone marrow or stem cell transplantation 
up to 6 months after completion of the intensive therapy phase (important: 
extent of GVHD and ongoing iatrogenic immunosuppression) – Acute inpatient 
treatment phase for autologous stem cell transplantation or after solid organ 
transplantation (until discharge)Risk group 3 (very severe 
immunosuppression/deficiency)– Allogeneic BMT/PBSCT in intensive therapy phase 
(until engraftment = regeneration of granulopoiesis) – Severe GVHD grade III or 
IV under intensive immunosuppression The decision to assign patients after 
allogeneic stem cell transplantation to group 3 is ultimately made by the 
treating hematologist-oncologist after reviewing all findings.GVHD = 
graft-versus-host-disease = graft-versus-host-reaction; BMT = mone marrow 
transplantation; PBSCT = peripheral blood stem cell transplantation. Table 
1.Medline search on the topic of the guideline (as of 12-2014 and 6-2022). 
KeywordsNumber of publications found Status 12-2014 [777]Number of publications 
found Status 6-2022Indoor mo(u)ld or indoor dampness and human 
health1,9493,145Indoor mo(u)ld or indoor dampness and human health and 
allergy1,8753,126Indoor mo(u)ld asthma440805Indoor mo(u)ld health 
asthma285564Indoor mo(u)ld human health asthma494Indoor mo(u)ld 
allergy1,198Indoor mo(u)ld health allergy434774Indoor mo(u)ld human health 
allergy689Indoor mo(u)ld atopy89Indoor mo(u)ld health atopy2459Indoor mo(u)ld 
human health atopy55Indoor mo(u)ld arthritis8Indoor mo(u)ld health 
arthritis4Indoor mo(u)ld human health arthritis3Indoor mo(u)ld rheumatism5Indoor 
mo(u)ld health rheumatism4Indoor mo(u)ld human health rheumatism3Mo(u)ld 
arthritis rheumatism4662Indoor mo(u)ld arthritis rheumatism2Indoor mo(u)ld 
health arthritis rheumatism2Indoor mo(u)ld human health arthritis 
rheumatism1Indoor mo(u)ld infection750Indoor mo(u)ld health infection74435Indoor 
mo(u)ld human health infection357Indoor mo(u)ld irritation113Indoor mo(u)ld 
health irritation4295Indoor mo(u)ld human health irritation85Indoor mo(u)ld 
symptoms1,159Indoor mo(u)ld health symptoms449724Indoor mo(u)ld human health 
symptoms594Indoor mo(u)ld ergosterol50Indoor mo(u)ld health ergosterol2436Indoor 
mo(u)ld human health ergosterol27Indoor mo(u)ld review450Indoor mo(u)ld health 
review301Indoor mo(u)ld human health review160266Indoor mo(u)ld trial67Indoor 
mo(u)ld health trial40Indoor mo(u)ld human health trial1732Indoor mo(u)ld 
clinical diagnosis89194Indoor mo(u)ld health clinical diagnosis113Indoor mo(u)ld 
human health clinical diagnosis93Indoor mo(u)ld diagnostic / 
diagnostics800Indoor mo(u)ld health diagnostic / diagnostics273449Indoor mo(u)ld 
human health diagnostic / diagnostics353Indoor mo(u)ld prevention654Indoor 
mo(u)ld health prevention216433Indoor mo(u)ld human health prevention358Indoor 
mo(u)ld treatment650Indoor mo(u)ld health treatment229360Indoor mo(u)ld human 
health treatment293Indoor mo(u)ld therapy507Indoor mo(u)ld health 
therapy196291Indoor mo(u)ld human health therapy250Indoor mo(u)ld air 
filter174Indoor mo(u)ld health air filter5494Indoor mo(u)ld human health air 
filter55 Table 10.Stage I - IV after conjunctival provocation test (CPT) [235]. 
Stage IForeign body sensation, reddening of the conjunctiva, onset of 
itchingStage IIAs I, plus lacrimation, more intense itching, reddening of the 
conjunctiva tarsi of the lower eyelidStage IIIAs II, additionally reddening of 
the conjunctiva tarsi of the upper eyelid, severe itching, blepharospasmStage 
IVAs III, additionally chemosis, eyelid swelling, irresistible itching Table 
11.Selection of diagnostic methods without sufficient scientific evidence or 
without a medical or scientific basis in environmental medicine [5, 73, 232, 
283, 350, 351, 352, 353, 355, 357, 512, 535, 684]. Diagnostic methods without 
sufficient scientific evidenceStress tests in body mediae.g., molds in the 
bloodAllergological examinationse.g., serial dilution titration, cytotoxic blood 
tests, determination of IgG and IgA antibodies directed against molds in type I 
allergiesInvestigations into disorders of the immune systeme.g., lymphocyte 
stimulation test, determination of lymphocyte subpopulations, determination of 
cytokinesInvestigations of the oxidative systeme.g., determination of oxidative 
stressOphthalmological examinationse.g., visual contrast sensitivity Test (VCS 
test)Diagnostic methods without a medical or scientific basisHolistic or 
bioenergetic diagnostic procedurese.g., electro-acupuncture according to Voll, 
bioresonance procedures, pendulum, Vega test, decoder dermography, biotonometry, 
biotensor, Kirlian photography (plasma print procedure, energetic terminal point 
diagnosis), regulation thermography according to Rost, auriculodiagnostics, 
kinesiology, aurascopy, iris diagnostics“Clinical ecology” proceduree.g., 
cytotoxic blood tests, provocation and neutralization test (PN test) Table 
12.Examples of treatment methods without sufficient scientific evidence or 
without a medical or scientific basis in environmental medicine [5, 73, 160, 
384, 512, 762]. Treatment methods without sufficient scientific evidence 
Antifungal treatment not in line with guidelines Detoxification therapy, e.g., 
with cholestyramine (CSM therapy) Dietary changes Homeopathic treatments 
Symbiosis controlTreatment methods without a medical or scientific basis 
Bioresonance therapy (Moratherapy) Autologous blood and urine treatment Holistic 
intestinal cleansing Salt therapy Clinical ecology procedures (e.g., provocation 
and neutralization test (PN test)) Table 13.Cochrane EBM Review by Sauni et al. 
(2011) [614] on the success of remediation measures after moisture or mold 
damage in relation to asthma and respiratory symptoms as well as the frequency 
of colds in adults and children. MeasureEffect on adultsEffect on childrenHome 
renovation (Evidence level: moderate)Wheezing (asthma): OR 0.64 (KI: 0.55 – 
0.75) Rhinitis: OR 0.57 (CI: 0.55 – 0.66) Acute treatments (mean difference): MD 
–0.45 (KI: –0.76 – –0.14) Table 14.The authors’ declarations of conflicts of 
interest and their assessment are presented below: Consultant or expert 
activityCollaboration in a scientific advisory boardPaid lecturing or training 
activitiesPaid authors or co-author-shipResearch projects / conducting clinical 
studiesProprietary interests (patent, copyright, share ownership)Indirect 
interestsTopics of the guideline affected by COI; classification of the conflict 
of interest (IC) with regard to relevance, consequenceDr. med. Ute 
AurbachNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC Consequence: nonePriv.-Doz. Dr. med. 
Sven BeckerNoYesYesNoYesNoBoard member AeDAClassification: moderate IC; 
consequence: no voting authorization for allergological topicsProf. Dr. med. 
Romuald BellmannYesYesYesNoNoNoMandate holder ÖGMMClassification: moderate IC; 
consequence: no eligibility for antifungal therapyProf. Dr. med. Karl-Christian 
BergmannYesYesYesNoNoNoMandate holder DGPClassification: moderate IC; 
consequence: not eligible to vote on asthma-related issuesProf. Dr. med. Oliver 
A. CornelyYesYesYesNoNoNoNoClassification: moderate IC; consequence: no voting 
rights for mycosis-related topicsProf. Dr. med. Steffen 
EngelhartNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder GHUP and DGKH, Member of the Board 
GHUPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. nat. Guido 
FischerNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. nat. 
Thomas GabrioNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. med. 
Birger HeinzowNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneProf. Dr. 
med. Caroline E.W. HerrNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder and President of the 
GHUPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. nat. Julia 
HurraßNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder and board member of the GHUPClassification: no 
IC; Consequence: noneDr. med. Marcus JoestNoNoYesNoNoNoNoClassification: low IC; 
consequence: no management function (coordination/AG management)Prof. Dr. med. 
Christian KaragiannidisNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot 
specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedClassification: not possible; consequence: 
not entitled to voteProf. Dr. med. Ludger KlimekNoYesYesNoYesNoMandate holder 
AeDAClassification: moderate IC; consequence: no voting rights for 
immunotherapyDr. rer. nat. Martin KöberleNoNoYesNoNoNoMandate holder 
DDGClassification: low IC; consequence: no management function (coordination/AG 
management)Dr. rer. nat. Annette KolkNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot 
specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedClassification: not possible; 
consequence: not entitled to voteDr. med. Dipl.-Chem. Herbert LichtneckerNot 
specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot 
specifiedClassification: not possible; consequence: not entitled to voteDr. med. 
Thomas Lob-CorziliusNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder GPAUClassification: no IC; 
Consequence: noneNorbert MülleneisenNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder 
DGPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneProf. Dr. med. Dennis 
NowakNoNoYesNoNoNoDGAUM and DGP elected representativesClassification: low IC; 
consequence: no management function (coordination/AG management)Dr. med. Uta 
RabeNoNoYesNoNoNoMandate holder AeDAClassification: low IC; consequence: no 
management function (coordination/AG management)Prof. Dr. rer. nat. Monika 
RaulfNoNoYesNoNoNoMandate holder DGAKI and DGAUMClassification: low IC; 
consequence: no management function (coordination/AG management)Prof. Dr. med. 
Jörg SteinmannNoNoYesNoNoNoNoClassification: low IC; consequence: no management 
function (coordination/AG management)Prof. Dr. med. Jens-Oliver 
SteißNoNoYesNoNoNoMandate holder BAPPClassification: low IC; consequence: no 
management function (coordination/AG management)Dr. med. Jannik 
StemlerNoNoYesNoNoNoNoClassification: low IC; consequence: no management 
function (coordination/AG management)Dr. med. Ulli UmpfenbachNoNoNoNoNoNoBoard 
member BAPP, WAPPA, AGAS, FAAKClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. 
nat. Kerttu ValtanenNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot 
specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedClassification: not possible; consequence: 
not entitled to voteDr. rer. nat. Sandra Walser-ReichenbachNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate 
holder GHUPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneDr. rer. medic. Barbora 
WerchanNoNoNoNoNoNoNoClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneProf. Dr. med. 
Gerhard A. WiesmüllerNoNoNoNoNoNoMandate holder and Board member 
GHUPClassification: no IC; Consequence: noneProf. Dr. med. Birgit 
WillingerNoYesYesNoNoNoMandate holder DMykGClassification: low IC; consequence: 
no management function (coordination/AG management)


5. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2024 Feb;153(2):461-470. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2023.08.037. Epub 2023 Oct 7.

Revised Swedish infant feeding guidelines are associated with earlier 
introduction of allergenic foods.

Österlund J(1), Granåsen G(2), Bodén S(3), Silfverdal SA(3), Domellöf M(3), 
Winberg A(3), West CE(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Pediatrics, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden. 
Electronic address: jonas.osterlund@umu.se.
(2)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå University, Umeå, 
Sweden.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences, Pediatrics, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Randomized controlled trials have demonstrated that early 
introduction of allergenic foods, such as peanut and egg, can reduce food 
allergy in high-risk children. Many international guidelines recommend 
introduction of allergenic foods in the first year of life, and accordingly, the 
Swedish National Food agency released updated guidelines in June 2019.
OBJECTIVE: Our aim was to examine whether the age at introduction and 
consumption frequency of allergenic foods have changed since release of the 
revised national guidelines on the introduction of solid foods in Sweden.
METHODS: Children born between June 2016 and December 2018 (n = 1925) were 
compared with children born between June 2019 and April 2021 (n = 1761) by using 
data from the NorthPop Birth Cohort study. Data on food introduction, eczema, 
and food allergy were prospectively collected until age 18 months by using 
web-based questionnaires. IgE sensitization was assessed at 18 age months.
RESULTS: The proportion of participants who had been introduced to egg, legume, 
soy products, peanut, almond, and cashew nut during the first year of life 
increased after implementation of the revised national guidelines. The most 
significant changes were seen for legume (from 55.2% to 69.8% [adjusted odds 
ratio = 1.90 (95% CI = 1.62-2.24)]) and peanut (from 29.2% to 43.2% adjusted 
odds ratio = 1.87 (95% CI = 1.55-2.24)]); consumption frequency had also 
increased. No differences in the prevalence of eczema, food allergy, or 
sensitization to the foods of interest were found.
CONCLUSION: Since release of the revised guidelines, infants in the general 
population are introduced to and consume a variety of allergenic foods earlier 
and more frequently; however, early manifestations of allergic disease have 
remained unchanged.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2023.08.037
PMID: 37813287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Allergy Clin Immunol Glob. 2023 Aug;2(3):100124. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacig.2023.100124. Epub 2023 Jun 3.

The SunBEAm birth cohort: Protocol design.

Keet C(1), Sicherer SH(2), Bunyavanich S(2), Visness C(3), Fulkerson PC(4), 
Togias A(4), Davidson W(4), Perry S(4), Hamrah S(4), Calatroni A(3), Robinson 
K(3), Dunaway L(3), Davis CM(5), Anvari S(5), Leong-Kee SM(6), Hershey GK(7), 
DeFranco E(8), Devonshire A(7), Kim H(9), Joseph C(9), Davidson B(9), Strong 
NK(2), Tsuang AJ(2), Groetch M(2), Wang J(2), Dantzer J(10), Mudd K(10), Aina 
A(11), Shreffler W(12), Yuan Q(13), Simmons V(13), Leung DYM(14), Hui-Beckman 
J(14), Ramos JA(15), Chinthrajah S(16), Winn V(17), Sindher T(16), Jones SM(18), 
Manning NA(19), Scurlock AM(18), Kim E(1), Stuebe A(20), Gern JE(21), Singh 
AM(21), Krupp J(22), Wood RA(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
(2)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York.
(3)Rho Inc, Federal Research Operations, Durham.
(4)Division of Allergy, Immunology and Transplantation, National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston.
(7)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati.
(8)University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati.
(9)Henry Ford Health, Detroit.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Allergy, Immunology and 
Rheumatology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore.
(11)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore.
(12)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston.
(13)Massachusetts General Hospital, Newton-Wellesley Hospital, Newton.
(14)National Jewish Health, Denver.
(15)Saint Joseph Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Denver.
(16)Sean N. Parker Center for Allergy and Asthma Research, Stanford University, 
Palo Alto.
(17)Division Maternal Fetal Medicine and Obstetrics, Stanford University, Palo 
Alto.
(18)University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences and Arkansas Children's 
Hospital, Little Rock.
(19)University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock.
(20)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill.
(21)Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin, Madison.
(22)Maternal and Fetal Medicine, Obstetrics and Gynecology, SSM Health, Madison.

BACKGROUND: Food allergy (FA) and atopic dermatitis (AD) are common conditions 
that often present in the first year of life. Identification of underlying 
mechanisms and environmental determinants of FA and AD is essential to develop 
and implement effective prevention and treatment strategies. Objectives: We 
sought to describe the design of the Systems Biology of Early Atopy (SunBEAm) 
birth cohort.
METHODS: Funded by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases 
(NIAID) and administered through the Consortium for Food Allergy Research 
(CoFAR), SunBEAm is a US population-based, multicenter birth cohort that enrolls 
pregnant mothers, fathers, and their newborns and follows them to 3 years. 
Questionnaire and biosampling strategies were developed to apply a systems 
biology approach to identify environmental, immunologic, and multiomic 
determinants of AD, FA, and other allergic outcomes.
RESULTS: Enrollment is currently underway. On the basis of an estimated FA 
prevalence of 6%, the enrollment goal is 2500 infants. AD is defined on the 
basis of questionnaire and assessment, and FA is defined by an algorithm 
combining history and testing. Although any FA will be recorded, we focus on the 
diagnosis of egg, milk, and peanut at 5 months, adding wheat, soy, cashew, 
hazelnut, walnut, codfish, shrimp, and sesame starting at 12 months. Sampling 
includes blood, hair, stool, dust, water, tape strips, skin swabs, nasal 
secretions, nasal swabs, saliva, urine, functional aspects of the skin, and 
maternal breast milk and vaginal swabs.
CONCLUSIONS: The SunBEAm birth cohort will provide a rich repository of data and 
specimens to interrogate mechanisms and determinants of early allergic outcomes, 
with an emphasis on FA, AD, and systems biology.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacig.2023.100124
PMCID: PMC10509956
PMID: 37771674

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURE STATEMENT Funded by the following 
grants from NIAID/National Institutes of Health (NIH): UM2AI130836, UM1AI130838, 
UM1AI130839, UM1AI130781, UM1AI130936, UM1AI130936, UM1AI130780, UM1AI130934, 
UM1AI130570, UM1AI173380, UM1AI151958, and UM1AI109565. The authorships of 
P.C.F., A.T., W.D., S.H., and S.P. do not constitute endorsement by the National 
Institute of Allergy and Infection Diseases, the National Institutes of Health, 
or any other agency of the United States government. Disclosure of potential 
conflict of interest: C. Keet reports royalties from UpToDate. S. H. Sicherer 
reports royalty payments from UpToDate and Johns Hopkins University Press; 
grants to his institution from NIAID, Food Allergy Research and Education, and 
Pfizer; personal fees from the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology; 
and deputy editorship of the Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology: In 
Practice, outside of the submitted work. C. M. Davis reports grant support from 
NIAID/NIH, Immune Tolerance Network, DBV Technologies, Regeneronm Pfizer, and 
Allergenis; and consultant for Aimmune. S. Anvari reports research support from 
NIAID/NIH and DBV Technologies; and serves on the advisory board for Sanofi. M. 
Groetch receives royalties from UpToDate, FARE, and the Academy of Nutrition and 
Dietetics; serves on the medical advisory board of IFPIES, as senior advisor to 
FARE, and as health sciences advisor for APFED; and sits on the editorial board 
of Journal of Food Allergy. W. Shreffler reports royalty payments from UpToDate; 
grants to his institution from NIAID and Food Allergy Research and Education; 
sponsored research funds from Aimune, Angany Therapeutics, Moderna, Regeneron, 
Vedanta Biosciences and consultant fees from Aimmune, ALK, Allergy Therapeutics, 
Novartis, Regeneron, and Sanofi. Dr. Leung reports support from Sanofi, 
Genentech, Leo Pharma, and Incyte. H. Kim reports advisory board for ALK, Kenota 
Health, and Ukko Inc; consultant for Allergy Therapeutics Ltd, Belhaven 
Biopharma, Duke Clinical Research Institute, Genentech, and Nutricia. J. Wang 
receives research support from NIAID, Aimmune, DBV Technologies, and Regeneron; 
and consultancy fees from ALK Abello and Jubilant HollisterStier. R. A. Wood 
reports research support from NIAID, Aimmune, Astellas, DBV, FARE, Genentech, 
HAL-Allergy, Novartis, and Regeneron; and royalties from UpToDate. The rest of 
the authors declare that they have no relevant conflicts of interest.


7. Am Fam Physician. 2023 Aug;108(2):159-165.

Food Allergies: Diagnosis, Treatment, and Prevention.

Bright DM(1), Stegall HL(1), Slawson DC(1).

Author information:
(1)Atrium Health Carolinas Medical Center Family Medicine and Wake Forest School 
of Medicine, Charlotte, North Carolina.

In the United States, approximately 2% to 3% of adults and 8% of children have a 
food allergy. Allergic reactions range from minor pruritus to life-threatening 
anaphylaxis. These allergies often lead to significant anxiety and costs for 
patients and caregivers. Common food allergies include peanuts, cow's milk, 
shellfish, tree nuts, egg, fish, soy, and wheat. Peanut allergy, the most 
common, is the leading cause of life-threatening anaphylaxis. Children with 
asthma, allergic rhinitis, atopic dermatitis, or an allergy to insect venom, 
medications, or latex are at an increased risk of developing food allergies. 
Diagnosis of food allergy starts with a detailed, allergy-focused history. Serum 
immunoglobulin E and skin prick testing provide reliable information regarding 
food allergy diagnoses. Primary treatment involves elimination of the offending 
food from the diet. Prevention strategies proven to decrease the risk of 
developing a food allergy include restricting exposure to cow's milk in the 
first three days of life and early sequential exposure to allergenic foods 
starting between four and six months of age. Exclusive breastfeeding for three 
to four months reduces the likelihood of developing eczema and asthma but does 
not reduce development of food allergies. Most children eventually outgrow 
allergies to cow's milk, egg, soy, and wheat. However, allergies to tree nuts, 
peanuts, and shellfish are more likely to be lifelong.

PMID: 37590855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Front Nutr. 2023 Jun 6;10:1099462. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2023.1099462. eCollection
 2023.

Cost-effectiveness of therapeutic infant formulas for cow's milk protein allergy 
management.

Suratannon N(1)(2), Prapansilp P(3), Srinarongsook A(3), Tanpowpong P(4), 
Chatchatee P(1)(2), Pongpirul K(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Center of Excellence for Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Division of 
Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital, The Thai Red Cross Society, Bangkok, 
Thailand.
(3)Medical Sciences, Reckitt | Mead Johnson Nutrition, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Bangkok, 
Thailand.
(5)Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(6)Department of Preventive and Social Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Cow's milk protein allergy (CMPA) is children's most common food allergy. 
Therapeutic infant formulas for CMPA lead to symptom-free and potentially 
benefit early tolerance induction and reducing the allergic march in 
non-breastfed babies. This study assessed the cost-effectiveness of CMPA 
management with different therapeutic infant formulas in Thailand, which may 
reflect situations in developing countries throughout Asia. An analytic decision 
model was developed to simulate the occurrence of eczema, urticaria, asthma, 
rhinoconjunctivitis, or being symptom-free in infants with CMPA over 36 months. 
Extensively hydrolyzed casein formula with added probiotic Lacticaseibacillus 
rhamnosus (previously Lactobacillus rhamnosus) strain GG (EHCF+LGG), extensively 
hydrolyzed whey formula (EHWF), soy protein-based formula (SPF), and amino acid 
formula (AAF) were compared from the healthcare payer perspective. The results 
from a prospective cohort study were used for comparative effectiveness 
measures, while local experts were interviewed to estimate the healthcare 
resource used in the management of CMPA. The costs of healthcare resources were 
obtained from standard, publicly available sources. The direct medical cost of 
CMPA management was lowest for EHCF+LGG (USD 1,720), followed by SPF (USD 
2,090), EHWF (USD 2,791), and AAF (USD 7,881). Compared with other formulas, 
EHCF+LGG was expected to save USD 370 (SPF), USD 1,071 (EHWF), and USD 6,161 
(AAF) in the total cost of CMPA management over 36 months. In conclusion, 
EHCF+LGG was the most cost-effective strategy for managing non-breastfed infants 
with CMPA. This strategy was associated with more children developing immune 
tolerance to cow's milk and being symptom-free, contributing to overall 
cost-saving potential.

Copyright © 2023 Suratannon, Prapansilp, Srinarongsook, Tanpowpong, Chatchatee 
and Pongpirul.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2023.1099462
PMCID: PMC10281430
PMID: 37346906

Conflict of interest statement: PP and AS are employees of Mead Johnson 
Nutrition, Thailand. NS, PT, PC, and KP are clinicians and received minimal 
financial support for contributing inputs as key opinion leaders for clinical 
(NS, PT, and PC) and methodological (KP) aspects of this study.


9. Rev Gastroenterol Peru. 2022 Oct-Dec;42(4):251-256.

[Eosinophilic duodenitis associated to food allergy debuting as acute visceral 
pain in an adult with vitiligo: a case report].

[Article in Spanish]

Bornacelly Mendoza AP(1), Moscote Granadillo MJ(2), Moreno Pallares ED(3), 
Moscote Teran CM(4).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Especialización en Medicina Interna,. Universidad Libre. 
Barranquilla, -Colombia.
(2)Programa de Especialización en Medicina Interna,. Universidad Libre. 
Barranquilla, -Colombia; Departamento de Gastroenterología, Clínica General del 
Norte. Barranquilla,-Colombia.
(3)IPSArtmédica., Medellín, Colombia.
(4)Clínica Iberoamérica., Barranquilla, Colombia.

Eosinophilic duodenitis has a prevalence of 5.1 to 8.2 per 100000 persons. The 
underlying molecular mechanisms are unknown, but hypersensitivity (seasonal and 
food allergies, asthma, eczema) response plays a major role in its pathogenesis, 
allergic predisposition can be found up-to 25-35% of cases. The diagnosis 
includes clinical manifestation, imaging findings and histological evidence of 
eosinophilic infiltration >20 eosinophils per high-power field. This is a 
clinical case report. a 25-years old man with vitiligo consult to emergency 
department referring dyspepsia symptoms, vomiting and abdominal pain of maximal 
intensity, in the medical exam upper abdominal pain was found, blood 
laboratories were unremarkable except a high net eosinophil-count >2000 
cells/ul, abdominal ultrasound were normal, upper endoscopy revealed duodenitis 
with rigid and thickened folds, colonoscopy show hemorrhoids grade I. Coproscopy 
exam was negative for parasites, total IgE, IgA and IgG were in normal range, a 
positive IgG to Toxoplasma gondii was reported, autoimmunity panel was negative. 
In the following 4 days the abdominal pain and eosinophils count increase, a new 
abdomin-pelvic tomography was done showing thickened duodenum with a new 
endoscopy showing marked edema in duodenum with severe biliary reflux with 
biopsies describing an atrophic chronic duodenitis. Allergy tests -skin prick 
and patch tests- were done resulting positive to cereals (rye, soy, barley), 
Manihot esculenta, green banana, tomato, cow milk, orange and pineapple. A 
restrictive diet and protons pump inhibitor was indicated, ambulatory control at 
45 days after show symptoms resolution with a normal blood eosinophils count. 
Here is reported a case of eosinophilic duodenitis related to food allergy in a 
young man with vitiligo debuting with an unusual clinical presentation of acute 
visceral pain and biliary reflux which resolved with elimination diet and 
pantoprazole without use of corticoids, with both, IgE and non-IgE mechanisms 
playing important roles explaining food sensitization.

PMID: 36746466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Asia Pac Allergy. 2022 Jul 12;12(3):e24. doi: 10.5415/apallergy.2022.12.e24. 
eCollection 2022 Jul.

Patterns of allergenic food introduction in Los Angeles inner-city children.

Kwong KY(1), Chen E(1), Tran P(2), Leibel S(3), Masood M(1), Boyle S(1), Scott 
L(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy-Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Los Angeles County 
+ University of Southern California Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Division of Allergy-Immunology, Childrens Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Division of Allergy-immunology, Rady Childrens Hospital, San Diego, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Early introduction of allergenic foods is recommended to reduce the 
risk of developing food allergies, but it is unclear whether recommendations are 
being followed.
OBJECTIVE: We examine patterns of allergenic food introduction in inner-city 
children enrolled in an academic pediatric practice in the greater Los Angeles 
area.
METHODS: This was a prospective study with patients ages 12 to 24 months 
recruited from the pediatrics continuity clinic at an inner-city tertiary 
medical center in the greater Los Angeles area. Caregivers were asked via 
anonymous surveys about their child's history of atopic diseases and at what age 
they first introduced egg, soy, wheat, peanut, tree nuts, fish, shrimp, and 
shellfish into their child's diet.
RESULTS: Two hundred caregivers responded to the survey. The average age of 
introduction of egg was 9.2 months, soy 10 months, wheat 9.3 months, peanut 10.5 
months, tree nuts 10.9 months, fish 10.9 months, shrimp 11.3 months, and 
shellfish 11.5 months. Between ages 4-11 months, 65.3% of children were 
introduced egg, 19.1% soy, 55.8% wheat, 28.6% peanut, 17.1% tree nuts, 28.1% 
fish, 13.6% shrimp, and 7.0% shellfish. By age 24 months, 92% of children were 
introduced egg, 37.7% soy, 85.4% wheat, 67.3% peanut, 47.7% tree nuts, 67.8% 
fish, 48.2% shrimp, and 30.2% shellfish. Of the 14 children with eczema or egg 
allergy, 26.1% were introduced peanut by age 4-6 months and 50% by age 4-11 
months.
CONCLUSION: Despite recommendations, inner-city caregivers may not be 
introducing allergenic foods in a timely manner to their children.

Copyright © 2022. Asia Pacific Association of Allergy, Asthma and Clinical 
Immunology.

DOI: 10.5415/apallergy.2022.12.e24
PMCID: PMC9353202
PMID: 35966161

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors have no 
financial conflicts of interest.