1. Sci Rep. 2021 Jul 5;11(1):13856. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-93459-3.

All trans retinoic acid alleviates coronary stenosis by regulating smooth muscle 
cell function in a mouse model of Kawasaki disease.

Suganuma E(1), Sato S(2), Honda S(3), Nakazawa A(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Allergy, Saitama Children's 
Medical Center, 1-2 Shintoshin Chuou-ku Saitama-shi, Saitama, 330-8777, Japan. 
eisuke1525vandy@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Allergy, Saitama Children's 
Medical Center, 1-2 Shintoshin Chuou-ku Saitama-shi, Saitama, 330-8777, Japan.
(3)Division of Clinical Research, Saitama Children's Medical Center, Saitama, 
Japan.

Coronary artery (CA) stenosis is a detrimental and often life-threatening 
sequela in Kawasaki disease (KD) patients with coronary artery aneurysm (CAA). 
Therapeutic strategies for these patients have not yet been established. 
All-trans-retinoic acid (atRA) is a modulator of smooth muscle cell functions. 
The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of atRA on CA stenosis 
in a mouse model of KD. Lactobacillus casei cell wall extract (LCWE) was 
intraperitoneally injected into 5-week-old male C57BL/6 J mice to induce CA 
stenosis. Two weeks later, the mice were orally administered atRA (30 mg/kg) 
5 days per week for 14 weeks (LCWE + atRA group, n = 7). Mice in the untreated 
group (LCWE group, n = 6) received corn oil alone. Control mice were injected 
with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, n = 5). Treatment with atRA significantly 
suppressed CA inflammation (19.3 ± 2.8 vs 4.4 ± 2.8, p < 0.0001) and reduced the 
incidence of CA stenosis (100% vs 18.5%, p < 0.05). In addition, atRA suppressed 
the migration of human coronary artery smooth muscle cells (HCASMCs) induced by 
platelet-derived growth factor subunit B homodimer (PDGF-BB). In conclusion, 
atRA dramatically alleviated CA stenosis by suppressing SMC migration. 
Therefore, it is expected to have clinical applications preventing CA stenosis 
in KD patients with CAA.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-93459-3
PMCID: PMC8257698
PMID: 34226641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


2. Br J Nutr. 2018 May;119(10):1157-1167. doi: 10.1017/S0007114518000417. Epub
2018  Mar 28.

Excess free fructose, high-fructose corn syrup and adult asthma: the Framingham 
Offspring Cohort.

DeChristopher LR(1), Tucker KL(2).

Author information:
(1)1Independent Researcher,Eugene, OR 97405,USA.
(2)2Department of Biomedical and Nutritional Sciences,University of 
Massachusetts Lowell,Lowell,MA 01854,USA.

There is growing evidence that intakes of high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS), 
HFCS-sweetened soda, fruit drinks and apple juice - a high-fructose 100 % juice 
- are associated with asthma, possibly because of the high fructose:glucose 
ratios and underlying fructose malabsorption, which may contribute to enteral 
formation of pro-inflammatory advanced glycation end products, which bind 
receptors that are mediators of asthma. Cox proportional hazards models were 
used to assess associations between intakes of these beverages and asthma risk, 
with data from the Framingham Offspring Cohort. Diet soda and orange juice - a 
100 % juice with a 1:1 fructose:glucose ratio - were included for comparison. 
Increasing intake of any combination of HFCS-sweetened soda, fruit drinks and 
apple juice was significantly associated with progressively higher asthma risk, 
plateauing at 5-7 times/week v. never/seldom, independent of potential 
confounders (hazard ratio 1·91, P<0·001). About once a day consumers of 
HFCS-sweetened soda had a 49 % higher risk (P<0·011), moderate apple juice 
consumers (2-4 times/week) had a 61 % higher risk (P<0·007) and moderate fruit 
drink consumers had a 58 % higher risk (P<0·009), as compared with never/seldom 
consumers. There were no associations with diet soda/orange juice. These 
associations are possibly because of the high fructose:glucose ratios, and 
fructose malabsorption. Recommendations to reduce consumption may be inadequate 
to address asthma risk, as associations are evident even with moderate intake of 
these beverages, including apple juice - a 100 % juice. The juice reductions in 
the US Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children 
in 2009, and the plateauing/decreasing asthma prevalence (2010-2013), 
particularly among non-Hispanic black children, may be related. Further research 
regarding the consequences of fructose malabsorption is needed.

DOI: 10.1017/S0007114518000417
PMID: 29587887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Front Plant Sci. 2014 Sep 8;5:440. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2014.00440. eCollection 
2014.

Flavone-rich maize: an opportunity to improve the nutritional value of an 
important commodity crop.

Casas MI(1), Duarte S(2), Doseff AI(2), Grotewold E(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Applied Plant Sciences, The Ohio State University Columbus, OH, 
USA ; Molecular Cellular and Developmental Biology Graduate Program, The Ohio 
State University Columbus, OH, USA ; Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio 
State University Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State University Columbus, OH, USA 
; Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care, and Sleep, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Heart and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University 
Columbus, OH, USA.
(3)Center for Applied Plant Sciences, The Ohio State University Columbus, OH, 
USA ; Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State University Columbus, OH, 
USA.

Agricultural outputs have resulted in food production continuously expanding. To 
satisfy the needs of a fast growing human population, higher yields, more 
efficient food processing, and food esthetic value, new crop varieties with 
higher caloric intake have and continue to be developed, but which lack many 
phytochemicals important for plant protection and adequate human nutrition. The 
increasing incidence of chronic diseases such as obesity, diabetes and 
cardiovascular diseases, combined with social disparity worldwide prompted the 
interest in developing enhanced crops that can simultaneously address the two 
sides of the current malnutrition sword, increasing yield while providing added 
nutritional value. Flavones, phytochemicals associated with the beneficial 
effects of the Mediterranean diet, have potent anti-inflammatory and 
anti-carcinogenic activities. However, many Mediterranean diet-associated 
vegetables are inaccessible, or lowly consumed, in many parts of the world. 
Maize is the most widely grown cereal crop, yet most lines used for hybrid maize 
production lack flavones. As a first step toward a sustainable strategy to 
increasing the nutritional value of maize-based diets, we investigated the 
accumulation and chemical properties of flavones in maize seeds of defined 
genotypes. We show that the pericarps of the P1-rr genotype accumulate flavones 
at levels comparable to those present in some flavone-rich vegetables, and are 
mostly present in their C- and O-glycosylated forms. Some of these glycosides 
can be readily converted into the corresponding more active health beneficial 
aglycones during food processing. Our results provide evidence that 
nutritionally beneficial flavones could be re-introduced into elite lines to 
increase the dietary benefits of maize.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2014.00440
PMCID: PMC4157551
PMID: 25250036


4. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 12;4(10):e7420. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007420.

Searching for new clues about the molecular cause of endomyocardial fibrosis by 
way of in silico proteomics and analytical chemistry.

Wayengera M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology, School of 
Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences, Makerere University, Kampala, 
Uganda. wmisaki@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Endomyocardial Fibrosis (EMF) -is a chronic inflammatory disease of 
the heart with related pathology to that of late stage Chaga's disease. Indeed, 
both diseases are thought to result from auto-immune responses against 
myocardial tissue. As is the case that molecular mimicry between the acidic 
termini of Trypanosoma cruzi ribosomal P0, P1 and P2beta (or simply TcP0, TcP1, 
and TcP2beta) proteins and myocardial tissue causes Chaga's disease, excessive 
exposure to certain infections, toxins including cassava ones, allergy and 
malnutrition has been suggested as the possible cause for EMF. Recent studies 
have defined the proteomic characteristics of the T. cruzi ribosomal P 
protein-C-termini involved in mediating auto-immunity against Beta1-adrenergic 
receptors of the heart in Chaga's disease. This study aimed to investigate the 
similarity of C-termini of TcP0/TcP2beta to sequences and molecules of several 
plants, microbial, viral and chemical elements- most prior thought to be 
possible causative agents for EMF.
METHODS AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Comparative Sequence alignments and phylogeny 
using the BLAST-P tool at the Swiss Institute of Biotechnology (SIB) revealed 
homologs of C-termini of TcP0 and TcP2beta among related proteins from several 
eukaryotes including the animals (Homo sapiens, C. elegans, D. melanogaster), 
plants (Arabidopsis thaliana, Zea mays, Glycina Max, Oryza sativa, Rhizopus 
oryzae) and protozoa (P. falciparum, T. gondii, Leishmania spp).The chemical 
formulae of the two T.cruzi ribosomal protein C-terminal peptides were found to 
be C(61)H(83)N(13)O(26)S(1)and C(64)H(87)N(13)O(28)S(1) respectively by 
Protparam. Both peptides are heavily negatively charged. Constitutively, both 
auto-antigens predominantly contain Asparagine (D), Glycine (G) and Phenylamine 
(F), with a balanced Leucine (L) and Methionine (M) percent composition of 7.7%. 
The afore going composition, found to be non-homologous to all molecules of 
chemical species in the databases searched, suggests the possible role of a 
metabolic pathway in the pathogenesis of EMF if aligned with our "molecular 
mimicry" hypothesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide a "window" to suggest that cross reactivity of 
antibodies against C-terminal sequences of several animal, plant and protozoal 
ribosomal P proteins with heart tissue may mediate EMF in a similar manner as C- 
termini of T. cruzi do for Chaga's disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007420
PMCID: PMC2757908
PMID: 19823676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The author has declared 
that no competing interests exist.


5. Int J Food Sci Nutr. 1998 Sep;49(5):339-42. doi: 10.3109/09637489809089408.

The effect of intermittent heating on some chemical parameters of refined oils 
used in Egypt. A public health nutrition concern.

Tewfik IH(1), Ismail HM, Sumar S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of Alexandria, Egypt.

As part of a public health campaign in Egypt, various chemical parameters of oil 
which are considered good indices in assessing the degree of thermal abuse, 
oxidation and overall quality (acid values, iodine values, peroxide values, 
etc.) were studied with respect to different frying oils. Ingestion of 
decomposition products formed as a results of thermal abuse and oxidation of 
frying oils are known to lead to a variety of symptoms and diseases (allergies, 
atherosclerosis, coronary heart disease). Results show that the oil most 
commonly used by street vendors in Egypt (blend of cotton seed and sunflower 
oil) is the least suitable for frying, while palm oil on the basis of the 
various chemical parameters studied, is the ideal choice. However, from the 
nutritional and public health stand point, the use of saturated oils is to be 
discouraged. Corn oil is therefore the next best choice from both the chemical 
and nutritional stand point, and is recommended for public use in a country in 
which deep-fried vegetable patties ('fallafel') forms the staple food item in 
the diet.

DOI: 10.3109/09637489809089408
PMID: 10367003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1992 Nov;146(5 Pt 1):1306-10. doi: 
10.1164/ajrccm/146.5_Pt_1.1306.

Bronchoconstriction and airway microvascular leakage in guinea pigs sensitized 
with trimellitic anhydride.

Hayes JP(1), Lotvall JO, Baraniuk J, Daniel R, Barnes PJ, Taylor AJ, Chung KF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, London, 
United Kingdom.

We have developed a guinea pig model of immediate airway responses following 
intradermal sensitization with free trimellitic anhydride (TMA). Guinea pigs 
were given an intradermal injection with either 0.1 ml of 0.3% TMA in corn oil 
(n = 8) or 0.1 ml of corn oil alone (n = 6). A guinea pig serum albumin 
conjugate of trimellitic anhydride (TMA-GPSA) was prepared with a substitution 
ratio of 21:1. All sensitized guinea pigs had raised specific serum IgG1 
antibodies (ELISA), and IgE antibodies were detected in six of the eight 
sensitized guinea pigs by passive cutaneous anaphylaxis. On Days 21 to 28, 
guinea pigs were anesthetized, tracheostomized, and ventilated. Evans blue dye 
(20 mg/ml), an albumin marker, was injected intravenously to quantify airway 
microvascular leakage (MVL). TMA-GPSA (50 microliters; 1%) in saline was 
instilled into the trachea. Lung resistance (RL) was measured for 6 min. The 
guinea pigs were killed, and the lungs were removed. Peak RL (cm H2O/ml x s-1) 
was significantly increased in sensitized guinea pigs from 0.26 +/- 0.01, mean 
+/- SEM to 21.3 +/- 6.9 (p < 0.05), compared with nonsensitized guinea pigs. 
There was a significant increase in Evans blue at all levels of the 
tracheobronchial tree in sensitized guinea pigs compared with the controls (p < 
0.005). The site of MVL was localized to the postcapillary venules as assessed 
by extravasation of intravascular Monastral blue dye. We conclude that 
intradermal sensitization of guinea pigs to TMA induces a polyclonal immune 
response, associated with bronchoconstriction and airway microvascular leakage, 
when challenged specifically with TMA-GPSA.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm/146.5_Pt_1.1306
PMID: 1443888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Br J Pharmacol. 1992 Aug;106(4):828-32. doi:
10.1111/j.1476-5381.1992.tb14420.x.

Involvement of inflammatory mediators in the airway responses to trimellitic 
anhydride in sensitized guinea-pigs.

Hayes JP(1), Lotvall JO, Barnes PJ, Newman Taylor AJ, Chung KF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Royal 
Brompton National Heart & Lung Hospital, London.

1. We examined the effect of various pharmacological agents on the acute 
bronchoconstrictor response and airway microvascular leakage in a model of 
guinea-pig sensitization to trimellitic anhydride (TMA) a cause of low molecular 
weight occupational asthma in man. 2. Guinea-pigs were given intradermal 
injections of 0.1 ml of 0.3% TMA in corn oil; 21-28 days later, anaesthetized 
guinea-pigs were challenged with TMA conjugated to guinea-pig albumin by 
tracheal instillation. Changes in lung resistance were measured and airway 
microvascular leakage was quantified by measuring the extravasation of Evans 
blue dye into the airway tissue. 3. Sensitized guinea-pig (n = 9 in each group) 
were pretreated with chlorpheniramine (2.5 mg kg-1, i.v.), WEB 2086 (10 
micrograms kg-1, i.v.), BW 4AC (50 mg kg-1, i.p.), nedocromil sodium (2% aerosol 
for 60 s) or vehicle alone. 4. Pretreatment with chlorpheniramine inhibited both 
the acute bronchoconstrictor response and the increase in airway microvascular 
leakage. WEB 2086 and nedocromil sodium partially inhibited the 
bronchoconstrictor response but had no significant effect on airway 
microvascular leakage. BW 4AC caused a non-significant reduction of the 
bronchoconstrictor response and airway microvascular leakage. 5. These results 
indicate that both the bronchoconstrictor response and the airway microvascular 
response in this model of sensitization is mediated to a large extent by 
histamine. PAF but not 5-lipoxygenase products also partially mediates the 
bronchoconstrictor response but not the airway microvascular leakage. Nedocromil 
sodium partially inhibits the bronchoconstrictor response only.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.1992.tb14420.x
PMCID: PMC1907679
PMID: 1382788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]