1. Nutrients. 2024 Jul 31;16(15):2485. doi: 10.3390/nu16152485.

Evaluation of Sourdough Bread and Its Potential Use in Support of the Treatment 
of Chronic Non-Communicable Diseases.

Bartos A(1), Malik A(2), Diowksz A(3), Podolska G(4), Leszczyńska J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioinorganic Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University 
of Lodz, Jana Muszyńskiego 1, 90-151 Łódź, Poland.
(2)Institute of Natural Products and Cosmetics, Faculty of Biotechnology and 
Food Sciences, Łódź University of Technology, Stefanowskiego 2/22, 90-537 Łódź, 
Poland.
(3)Institute of Fermentation Technology and Microbiology, Faculty of 
Biotechnology and Food Sciences, Łódź University of Technology, Wólczańska 
171/173, 90-530 Łódź, Poland.
(4)Institute of Soil Science and Plant Cultivation, Czartoryskich 8, 24-100 
Puławy, Poland.

Gastrointestinal disorders dysregulate the biochemical environment of the 
gastrointestinal tract by altering pH conditions during the gastric phase of 
digestion or by reducing the secretion of pancreatin during the intestinal part 
of the process. Ingested functional food could therefore lose some of its 
health-promoting potential apart from its nutritional value. In this work, we 
aimed to manufacture bread marked by decreased gluten content, using a 
commercial or laboratory sourdough, that could be appropriate for patients 
afflicted with wheat allergy, hypertension and pancreatic malfunctions. A 
reference sample (no sourdough) was prepared alongside wheat and wheat-rye bread 
samples-produced with either commercial or laboratory sourdough (L. plantarum 
BS, L. brevis 1269, L. sanfranciscensis 20663). We measured the QQQPP allergen 
content (ELISA) in bread extracts digested in vitro and determined how these 
extracted components affect the level of active angiotensin and alpha amylase 
(spectrophotometry). We then elucidated how these properties changed when 
physiological digestion conditions (pH and pancreatin activity) were disturbed 
to mimic gastric hyperacidity, hypochlorhydria or exocrine pancreatic 
insufficiency. The key finding was that every tested type of bread produced with 
laboratory sourdough exhibited pronounced angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibition. The effect was preserved even in dysregulated digestive conditions. 
The use of laboratory sourdough prevented an increase in allergenicity when 
pancreatin was restricted as opposed to the commercial sourdough, which 
surpassed the reference sample reading at 50% pancreatin. No statistically 
consistent link was reported when the inhibition of alpha amylase was assayed. 
In conclusion, functional bread manufactured with sourdough composed of L. 
plantarum BS, L. brevis 1269, and L. sanfranciscensis 20663 was shown to be 
potentially capable of contributing to the treatment against hypertension as 
evidenced by in vitro research. It was also moderately safer with regard to its 
allergenicity.

DOI: 10.3390/nu16152485
PMCID: PMC11314531
PMID: 39125365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


2. Rev Alerg Mex. 2024 Feb 1;71(1):63. doi: 10.29262/ram.v71i1.1358.

[Anaphylaxis due to legumes: case report].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Alzate-Pérez LJ(1), Aguirre-Morales N(2), Diez-Zuluaga LS(3).

Author information:
(1)Residente en Alergología Clínica, Universidad de Antioquia. Grupo de 
Alergología Clínica y Experimental (GACE), Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, 
Colombia. leidyj.alzate@udea.edu.co.
(2)Médica, especialista en Alergología Clínica, Universidad de Antioquia. Grupo 
de Alergología Clínica y Experimental (GACE), Universidad de Antioquia, 
Medellín, Colombia. Alergo SAS Y IPS CIGE.
(3)Médica, especialista en Alergología Clínica, Universidad de Antioquia. Grupo 
de Alergología Clínica y Experimental (GACE), docente de la Universidad de 
Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia. Hospital Alma Mater.

BACKGROUND: Legumes belonging to the family Fabaceae of the order Fabales are a 
widely consumed source of protein. IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reactions to 
legumes have been described, the most studied allergens being peanuts and 
soybeans. In the Mediterranean region and India, lentils, chickpeas and peas 
have been considered important allergens and legumes have been reported to 
represent the fifth most common cause of food allergy in children under 5 years 
of age in Spain. In Latin America, there are few reports of allergy to legumes 
other than peanuts, and these are especially in the paediatric population.
OBJECTIVE: To describe a case of IgE-mediated legume allergy in an adult female 
patient.
CASE REPORT: We describe the case of a 65-year-old female patient who reports a 
20-year history of generalized urticaria, accompanied by angioedema and dyspnea 
occurring immediately after consumption of lentils, beans, chickpeas, soya beans 
and cold meats, requiring admission to the emergency department for this cause. 
Tolerates peanuts. She does not report anaphylaxis in any context other than 
those described. He has presented generalized pruritus with exposure to fumes 
from cooking beans. Pathological history: Hypertension, type II diabetes 
mellitus, hypothyroidism. Allergic: Anaphylaxis due to penicillin at the age of 
30. Other history: extensive local reaction to hymenoptera sting. Prick test 
trophoallergens: soya 3 mm. Prick to prick protein based on commercial soybean 
7mm, chickpea 5mm, lentil 6mm and bean 7mm. He was negative for wheat and peanut 
(Image 1) (Attached in separate file). It has a normal tryptase report. 
Indication was given for adequate adrenaline and strict avoidance of legumes, 
except peanuts.
CONCLUSIONS: Legume allergy is little known in our environment and mainly 
affects children. Clinical manifestations include mild reactions and 
anaphylaxis. A high degree of cross-reactivity among legumes has been reported. 
Lentils have cross-reactivity with chickpeas and beans. Peanut allergy may also 
be associated with allergy to lentils, chickpeas, and peas, but is less 
frequently reported.

Publisher: ANTECEDENTES: Las leguminosas pertenecientes a la familia Fabaceae 
del orden Fabales, son una fuente de proteína de amplio consumo. Se han descrito 
reacciones de hipersensibilidad mediadas por IgE a las leguminosas, siendo los 
alérgenos más estudiados el maní y la soya. En la región mediterránea y en 
India, las lentejas, garbanzos y arvejas se han considerado alérgenos 
importantes, y se ha informado que las leguminosas representan la quinta causa 
más común de alergia alimentaria en niños menores de cinco años en España. En 
América Latina, hay pocos reportes de alergia a las leguminosas diferentes al 
maní, y éstos son, especialmente, en población pediátrica.
OBJETIVO: Describir el caso de alergia mediada por IgE a leguminosas, en una 
paciente adulta.
REPORTE DE CASO: Se describe el caso de una paciente de 65 años, quien reporta 
un cuadro de 20 años con evolución consistente de urticaria generalizada, 
acompañada de angioedema y disnea, que ocurre, en forma inmediata, tras el 
consumo lentejas, fríjoles, garbanzos, soya y carnes frías; y requiere de 
ingresos al servicio de urgencias por esta causa. Tolera maní. No se reporta 
anafilaxia en otro contexto diferente a los descritos. Ha presentado prurito 
generalizado con la exposición a vapores de la cocción de fríjoles. Antecedentes 
patológicos: hipertensión arterial, diabetes mellitus tipo II, hipotiroidismo. 
Alérgicos: Anafilaxia por Penicilina a los 30 años. Otros antecedentes: Reacción 
local extensa con picadura de himenópteros. Prick test trofoalérgenos: soya 3 
mm. Prick to prick proteína a base de soya comercial 7mm, garbanzo 5mm, lenteja 
6mm y fríjol 7mm. Fue negativa para trigo y maní (Imagen 1). (Adjunta en archivo 
separado). Tiene reporte de triptasa normal. Se dio indicación de porte adecuado 
de adrenalina y evitación estricta de leguminosas, excepto maní.
CONCLUSIONES: La alergia a las leguminosas es poco conocida en nuestro medio, y 
afecta principalmente a los niños. Sus manifestaciones clínicas incluyen 
reacciones leves y anafilaxia. Se ha informado, un alto grado de reactividad 
cruzada entre las leguminosas. Las lentejas tienen reactividad cruzada con 
garbanzos y fríjoles. La alergia al maní también puede estar asociada con la 
alergia a lentejas, garbanzos y guisantes, pero se informa con menos frecuencia.

DOI: 10.29262/ram.v71i1.1358
PMID: 38683081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Eur Respir J. 2023 Oct 19;62(4):2301547. doi: 10.1183/13993003.01547-2023.
Print  2023 Oct.

Sorting the wheat from the chaff: the innovative case of precision 
transpulmonary metabolomics.

Andruska AM(1)(2), Zamanian RT(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Department of Medicine, Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(2)Vera Moulton Wall Center for Pulmonary Vascular Disease, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Department of Medicine, Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA, USA zamanian@stanford.edu.

Comment on
    Eur Respir J. 2023 Oct 19;62(4):2300561. doi: 10.1183/13993003.00561-2023.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.01547-2023
PMID: 37857433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: A.M. Andruska has no 
potential conflicts of interest to disclose. R.T. Zamanian reports research 
funds (paid to institution) from Janssen, United Therapeutics and Merck, is 
consultant to Morphogen-IX, GossamerBio, Aerovate, Vivus and Janssen, and has 
stock options with Vivus, Reviva and Genentech.


4. Molecules. 2022 Feb 11;27(4):1212. doi: 10.3390/molecules27041212.

Glucose/Ribitol Dehydrogenase and 16.9 kDa Class I Heat Shock Protein 1 as Novel 
Wheat Allergens in Baker's Respiratory Allergy.

Olivieri M(1), Spiteri G(1), Brandi J(2), Cecconi D(2), Fusi M(2), Zanoni G(3), 
Rizzi C(2).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Occupational Medicine, Department of Diagnostic and Public Health, 
University of Verona, 37134 Verona, Italy.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, University of Verona, 37134 Verona, Italy.
(3)Immunology Unit, University Hospital of Verona, 37135 Verona, Italy.

Wheat allergens are responsible for symptoms in 60-70% of bakers with 
work-related allergy, and knowledge, at the molecular level, of this disorder is 
progressively accumulating. The aim of the present study is to investigate the 
panel of wheat IgE positivity in allergic Italian bakers, evaluating a possible 
contribution of novel wheat allergens included in the water/salt soluble 
fraction. The water/salt-soluble wheat flour proteins from the Italian wheat 
cultivar Bolero were separated by using 1-DE and 2-DE gel electrophoresis. 
IgE-binding proteins were detected using the pooled sera of 26 wheat allergic 
bakers by immunoblotting and directly recognized in Coomassie stained gel. After 
a preparative electrophoretic step, two enriched fractions were furtherly 
separated in 2-DE allowing for detection, by Coomassie, of three different 
proteins in the range of 21-27 kDa that were recognized by the pooled baker's 
IgE. Recovered spots were analyzed by nanoHPLC Chip tandem mass spectrometry 
(MS/MS). The immunodetected spots in 2D were subjected to mass spectrometry (MS) 
analysis identifying two new allergenic proteins: a glucose/ribitol 
dehydrogenase and a 16.9 kDa class I heat shock protein 1. Mass spectrometer 
testing of flour proteins of the wheat cultivars utilized by allergic bakers 
improves the identification of until now unknown occupational wheat allergens.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules27041212
PMCID: PMC8875590
PMID: 35209002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


5. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016 Aug;16(4):404-11. doi: 
10.1097/ACI.0000000000000291.

Doctor, when should I feed solid foods to my infant?

Fiocchi A(1), Dahdah L, Bahna SL, Mazzina O, Assa'ad A.

Author information:
(1)aDivision of Allergy, University Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Hospital 
Bambino Gesù, Rome, Vatican City, Italy bAllergy and Immunology Section, 
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana 
cDivision of Allergy and Immunology, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Modalities and timing of the introduction of solid foods to 
infants may influence growth, obesity, atherosclerosis, hyperlipidemia, 
hypertension, diabetes, and metabolic disease. The most debated effects of solid 
foods introduction are those on the development of food allergy.
RECENT FINDINGS: For the first time, in recent years prospective studies have 
been published about the effects of early vs. delayed introduction of allergenic 
foods into the infants' diet on food allergy. According to these studies, the 
early introduction of peanut may be a powerful protecting factor against peanut 
allergy in some risk categories. This seems not be true for wheat, cow's milk, 
sesame, and whitefish. The effect of early introduction of egg on egg allergy 
are controversial.
SUMMARY: The recent studies have changed the practice recommendations given by 
healthcare providers to families. We review the modifications of the 
recommendations of international societies on the introduction of solid foods, 
both to the general population and to infants at risk for allergy.

DOI: 10.1097/ACI.0000000000000291
PMID: 27327121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Jun;59(6):1255-61. doi: 10.1007/s10620-013-2981-6. Epub 2013
 Dec 28.

Characteristics of patients who avoid wheat and/or gluten in the absence of 
Celiac disease.

Tavakkoli A(1), Lewis SK, Tennyson CA, Lebwohl B, Green PH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Celiac Disease Center, Columbia University, 180 Fort 
Washington Avenue, Suite 936, New York, NY, 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Jun;59(6):1080-2. doi: 10.1007/s10620-014-3083-9.

BACKGROUND: Gastrointestinal symptoms that respond to the removal of wheat 
and/or gluten are becoming more common. Patients who avoid wheat and/or gluten 
(PWAWG) are a heterogeneous group and predominantly self-diagnosed prior to 
presenting for clinical evaluation.
SPECIFIC AIM: We characterized PWAWGs seen at a tertiary care referral center 
and compared them to patients with celiac disease (CD) and subjects in the 
National Health and Nutrition examination survey (NHANES).
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study evaluating patients seen by four 
gastroenterologists at a CD referral center. Baseline characteristics, 
laboratory values, and medical comorbidities were compared to CD patients who 
presented at the same center and subjects enrolled in NHANES.
RESULTS: Eighty-four PWAWGs were identified and compared to 585 CD patients and 
2,686 NHANES patients. Thirty-two alternative diagnoses were made in 25 (30%) 
PWAWGs, including small intestinal bacterial overgrowth and fructose/lactose 
intolerance. When compared to patients with CD, PWAWGs had similar body mass 
index (BMI, 23.1 vs. 23.5, p = 0.54) and mean hemoglobin value (13.4 vs. 13.3, p 
= 0.6). When compared to male and female patients in NHANES, BMI, folate, and 
mean hemoglobin values were lower in PWAWGs. Both male and female PWAWGs had a 
lower prevalence of hypertension.
CONCLUSION: While there are similarities between CD and PWAWGs that could 
possibly be due to shared HLA haplotypes or an effect of the gluten-free diet, 
alternative diagnoses are common in these patients. PWAWGs have a similar 
cardiovascular profile as CD patients in terms of lower BMI and lower prevalence 
of hypertension.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-013-2981-6
PMID: 24374645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Clin Exp Allergy. 2011 Jul;41(7):1031-43. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2222.2011.03766.x.  Epub 2011 May 31.

A new approach to the isolation and characterization of wheat flour allergens.

Sotkovský P(1), Sklenář J, Halada P, Cinová J, Setinová I, Kainarová A, Goliáš 
J, Pavlásková K, Honzová S, Tučková L.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Academy of Sciences of Czech Republic, Prague, 
Czech Republic. psotkovsky@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: The incidence of food allergy to wheat is increasing. Its diagnosis 
depends on the purity of major allergens and their inclusion in tests. Isolation 
and characterization of wheat allergens are therefore of utmost importance.
OBJECTIVE: To purify and identify wheat flour allergens most frequently 
recognized by patients' IgE antibodies and to study their allergenicity.
METHODS: Water/salt-soluble extracts from wheat flour were prepared and 
separated using a combination of ultrafiltration, isoelectric focusing and 
liquid chromatography. Purified proteins were analysed by immunoblotting using 
pooled sera from patients with atopic dermatitis who possessed IgE specific to 
wheat. Wheat proteins found to bind IgE were subsequently identified by 
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation-time of flight mass spectrometry. 
The frequency and intensity of IgE binding of isolated proteins were tested 
using individual sera from patients and controls.
RESULTS: We developed a procedure that allows isolation of wheat allergens from 
natural sources. Twenty-seven potential wheat allergens have been successfully 
identified; of these, the following seven are newly reported in food allergy: 
endogenous α-amylase/subtilisin inhibitor, trypsin/α-amylase inhibitor (AAI) 
CMX1/CMX3, thaumatin-like protein (TLP), xylanase inhibitor protein-1, 
β-glucosidase, class II chitinase and 26 kDa endochitinase. TLP and wheatwin 
were shown to activate patients' basophils to a similar extent as two well-known 
allergens, lipid transfer protein (Tri a 14) and AAI 0.19 (Tri a 28.0101).
CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Our new approach enables the isolation of 
water/salt-soluble wheat allergens in their native form in amounts sufficient 
both for biological testing (in vivo and in vitro) and for physicochemical 
characterization. Such studies will lead to a more detailed knowledge of 
allergenicity of wheat proteins and to improved accuracy of diagnostic tests.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2011.03766.x
PMID: 21623965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Dermatol. 2007 Feb;34(2):110-3. doi: 10.1111/j.1346-8138.2006.00227.x.

Food-dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis with a high level of plasma 
noradrenaline.

Kato Y(1), Nagai A, Saito M, Ito T, Koga M, Tsuboi R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan. 
y-kato@tokyo-med.ac.jp

Ingesting certain foods sometimes triggers anaphylaxis when followed by exercise 
(food-dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis, FDEIA). Specific food-induced 
mucocutaneous urticaria may also progress to anaphylaxis (oral allergy syndrome, 
OAS). A positive skin test and/or radioallergosorbent test (RAST) to the foods 
suggest involvement of immunoglobulin (Ig)E-anaphylaxis in both disorders. The 
triggering foods and initial target organs are usually different in each case. 
In the present study, a 32-year-old male reported dyspnea accompanied by wheals, 
and symptoms of low blood pressure while walking after eating Chinese noodles 
and donuts. He also reported uncomfortable sensations in his mouth and throat 
after ingesting melon. Exercise challenge tests were administered. Serum 
histamine, plasma adrenaline, noradrenaline and dopamine were measured pre- and 
post-test. No symptoms were induced by exercise or by the ingestion of any 
single food item before exercise. However, numerous wheals appeared when 
exercise followed the combined ingestion of foods. Likewise, the sequence of 
eating pancakes and then exercising resulted in numerous wheals and anaphylaxis. 
Olopatadine hydrochloride and ketotifen fumarate completely inhibited this 
anaphylaxis. The skin prick tests resulted in fruit-induced erythema and wheals. 
The results of these tests with wheat, butter and sugar were negative, and no 
symptoms were induced by the exercise test after ingestion of watermelon, melon 
or apple. The anaphylactoid symptoms were accompanied by a significant increase 
of plasma noradrenaline. In this case, not only wheat, but sugar and butter may 
induce the onset of FDEIA. There was no significant correlation between the 
intensity of the symptoms and the serum histamine levels in the present case. 
Noradrenaline may be involved in the onset of FDEIA, since noradrenaline may 
selectively inhibit T-helper (Th)1 functions while favoring Th2 responses. The 
tests showed no cross-reactivity between the causative foods of OAS and FDEIA, 
indicating that the mechanisms of onset are different between them.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1346-8138.2006.00227.x
PMID: 17239147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Lancet. 1979 May 5;1(8123):966-9. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(79)91735-5.

Food allergies and migraine.

Grant EC.

60 migraine patients completed elimination diets after a 5-day period of 
withdrawal from their normal diet. 52 (87%) of these patients had been using 
oral contraceptive steroids, tobacco, and/or ergotamine for an average of 3 
years, 22 years, and 7.4 years respectively. The commonest foods causing 
reactions were wheat (78%), orange (65%), eggs (45%), tea and coffee (40% each), 
chocolate and milk (37%) each), beef (35%), and corn, cane sugar, and yeast (33% 
each). When an average of ten common foods were avoided there was a dramatic 
fall in the number of headaches per month, 85% of patients becoming 
headache-free. The 25% of patients with hypertension became normotensive. 
Chemicals in the home environment can make this testing difficult for 
outpatients. Both immunological and non-immunological mechanisms may play a part 
in the pathogenesis of migraine caused by food intolerance.

DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(79)91735-5
PMID: 87628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]