1. J AOAC Int. 2012 Jan-Feb;95(1):206-15. doi: 10.5740/jaoacint.11-042.

Validation of a new enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay to detect the triggering 
proteins and peptides for celiac disease: interlaboratory study.

Mujico JR(1), Dekking L, Kooy-Winkelaar Y, Verheijen R, van Wichen P, Streppel 
L, Sajic N, Drijfhout JW, Koning F.

Author information:
(1)Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Immunology and Blood 
Transfusion, Leiden, The Netherlands. jrmujico@gmail.com

The performance of Gluten-Tec (EuroProxima, Arnhem, The Netherlands) was tested 
through an interlaboratory study in accordance with AOAC guidelines. Gluten-Tec 
is a competitive ELISA that detects an immunostimulatory epitope of a-gliadin in 
dietary food for celiacs. Fifteen laboratories, representing 14 different 
countries, announced their interest in taking part in this study. Of the 12 
laboratories that sent the results within the established timeframe, two 
submitted inappropriate standard curves and were excluded from the statistical 
analysis. Four different food matrixes (rice-based baby food, maize bread, 
chocolate cake mix, and beer) were selected for preparing the test samples. Two 
gliadin extraction procedures were used: the conventional 60% ethanol, and a new 
method based on the reducing reagent dithiothreitol. The 38 samples (19 blind 
duplicates) tested in this study were prepared by diluting the different 
extracts in order to cover a wide range of gliadin levels. Both sample 
extraction and dilution were performed by EuroProxima; the present 
interlaboratory study was focused only on testing the ELISA part of the 
Gluten-Tec kit protocol. Repeatability values (within-laboratory variance), 
expressed as RSD(r) ranged from 6.2 to 25.7%, while reproducibility values 
(interlaboratory variance), expressed as RSD(R), ranged from 10.6 to 45.9%. Both 
statistical parameters were in the acceptable range of ELISAs under these 
conditions, and the method will be presented to the Codex Alimentarius as a 
preferred method for gluten analysis.

DOI: 10.5740/jaoacint.11-042
PMID: 22468361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Lancet. 1979 May 5;1(8123):966-9. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(79)91735-5.

Food allergies and migraine.

Grant EC.

60 migraine patients completed elimination diets after a 5-day period of 
withdrawal from their normal diet. 52 (87%) of these patients had been using 
oral contraceptive steroids, tobacco, and/or ergotamine for an average of 3 
years, 22 years, and 7.4 years respectively. The commonest foods causing 
reactions were wheat (78%), orange (65%), eggs (45%), tea and coffee (40% each), 
chocolate and milk (37%) each), beef (35%), and corn, cane sugar, and yeast (33% 
each). When an average of ten common foods were avoided there was a dramatic 
fall in the number of headaches per month, 85% of patients becoming 
headache-free. The 25% of patients with hypertension became normotensive. 
Chemicals in the home environment can make this testing difficult for 
outpatients. Both immunological and non-immunological mechanisms may play a part 
in the pathogenesis of migraine caused by food intolerance.

DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(79)91735-5
PMID: 87628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]