1. Nutrients. 2024 Jul 31;16(15):2485. doi: 10.3390/nu16152485.

Evaluation of Sourdough Bread and Its Potential Use in Support of the Treatment 
of Chronic Non-Communicable Diseases.

Bartos A(1), Malik A(2), Diowksz A(3), Podolska G(4), Leszczyńska J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioinorganic Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University 
of Lodz, Jana Muszyńskiego 1, 90-151 Łódź, Poland.
(2)Institute of Natural Products and Cosmetics, Faculty of Biotechnology and 
Food Sciences, Łódź University of Technology, Stefanowskiego 2/22, 90-537 Łódź, 
Poland.
(3)Institute of Fermentation Technology and Microbiology, Faculty of 
Biotechnology and Food Sciences, Łódź University of Technology, Wólczańska 
171/173, 90-530 Łódź, Poland.
(4)Institute of Soil Science and Plant Cultivation, Czartoryskich 8, 24-100 
Puławy, Poland.

Gastrointestinal disorders dysregulate the biochemical environment of the 
gastrointestinal tract by altering pH conditions during the gastric phase of 
digestion or by reducing the secretion of pancreatin during the intestinal part 
of the process. Ingested functional food could therefore lose some of its 
health-promoting potential apart from its nutritional value. In this work, we 
aimed to manufacture bread marked by decreased gluten content, using a 
commercial or laboratory sourdough, that could be appropriate for patients 
afflicted with wheat allergy, hypertension and pancreatic malfunctions. A 
reference sample (no sourdough) was prepared alongside wheat and wheat-rye bread 
samples-produced with either commercial or laboratory sourdough (L. plantarum 
BS, L. brevis 1269, L. sanfranciscensis 20663). We measured the QQQPP allergen 
content (ELISA) in bread extracts digested in vitro and determined how these 
extracted components affect the level of active angiotensin and alpha amylase 
(spectrophotometry). We then elucidated how these properties changed when 
physiological digestion conditions (pH and pancreatin activity) were disturbed 
to mimic gastric hyperacidity, hypochlorhydria or exocrine pancreatic 
insufficiency. The key finding was that every tested type of bread produced with 
laboratory sourdough exhibited pronounced angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibition. The effect was preserved even in dysregulated digestive conditions. 
The use of laboratory sourdough prevented an increase in allergenicity when 
pancreatin was restricted as opposed to the commercial sourdough, which 
surpassed the reference sample reading at 50% pancreatin. No statistically 
consistent link was reported when the inhibition of alpha amylase was assayed. 
In conclusion, functional bread manufactured with sourdough composed of L. 
plantarum BS, L. brevis 1269, and L. sanfranciscensis 20663 was shown to be 
potentially capable of contributing to the treatment against hypertension as 
evidenced by in vitro research. It was also moderately safer with regard to its 
allergenicity.

DOI: 10.3390/nu16152485
PMCID: PMC11314531
PMID: 39125365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


2. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2024 Aug;22(8):1575-1583. doi: 
10.1016/j.cgh.2024.03.046. Epub 2024 Jun 12.

AGA Clinical Practice Update on Management of Iron Deficiency Anemia: Expert 
Review.

DeLoughery TG(1), Jackson CS(2), Ko CW(3), Rockey DC(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, Oregon.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, VA Loma Linda Veterans Health Care System, 
Loma Linda, California; Department of Medicine, Loma Linda University, Loma 
Linda, California.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, 
Washington. Electronic address: cwko@uw.edu.
(4)Digestive Disease Research Center, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, South Carolina.

DESCRIPTION: In this Clinical Practice Update (CPU), we will Best Practice 
Advice (BPA) guidance on the appropriate management of iron deficiency anemia.
METHODS: This expert review was commissioned and approved by the AGA Institute 
Clinical Practice Updates Committee (CPUC) and the AGA Governing Board to 
provide timely guidance on a topic of high clinical importance to the AGA 
membership, and underwent internal peer review by the CPUC and external peer 
review through standard procedures of Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology. 
These Best Practice Advice (BPA) statements were drawn from a review of the 
published literature and from expert opinion. Since systematic reviews were not 
performed, these BPA statements do not carry formal ratings regarding the 
quality of evidence or strength of the presented considerations. BEST PRACTICE 
ADVICE 1: No single formulation of oral iron has any advantages over any other. 
Ferrous sulfate is preferred as the least expensive iron formulation. BEST 
PRACTICE ADVICE 2: Give oral iron once a day at most. Every-other-day iron 
dosing may be better tolerated for some patients with similar or equal rates of 
iron absorption as daily dosing. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 3: Add vitamin C to oral 
iron supplementation to improve absorption. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 4: Intravenous 
iron should be used if the patient does not tolerate oral iron, ferritin levels 
do not improve with a trial of oral iron, or the patient has a condition in 
which oral iron is not likely to be absorbed. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 5: 
Intravenous iron formulations that can replace iron deficits with 1 or 2 
infusions are preferred over those that require more than 2 infusions. BEST 
PRACTICE ADVICE 6: All intravenous iron formulations have similar risks; true 
anaphylaxis is very rare. The vast majority of reactions to intravenous iron are 
complement activation-related pseudo-allergy (infusion reactions) and should be 
treated as such. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 7: Intravenous iron therapy should be used 
in individuals who have undergone bariatric procedures, particularly those that 
are likely to disrupt normal duodenal iron absorption, and have iron-deficiency 
anemia with no identifiable source of chronic gastrointestinal blood loss. BEST 
PRACTICE ADVICE 8: In individuals with inflammatory bowel disease and 
iron-deficiency anemia, clinicians first should determine whether 
iron-deficiency anemia is owing to inadequate intake or absorption, or loss of 
iron, typically from gastrointestinal bleeding. Active inflammation should be 
treated effectively to enhance iron absorption or reduce iron depletion. BEST 
PRACTICE ADVICE 9: Intravenous iron therapy should be given in individuals with 
inflammatory bowel disease, iron-deficiency anemia, and active inflammation with 
compromised absorption. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 10: In individuals with portal 
hypertensive gastropathy and iron-deficiency anemia, oral iron supplements 
initially should be used to replenish iron stores. Intravenous iron therapy 
should be used in patients with ongoing bleeding who do not respond to oral iron 
therapy. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 11: In individuals with portal hypertensive 
gastropathy and iron-deficiency anemia without another identified source of 
chronic blood loss, treatment of portal hypertension with nonselective 
β-blockers can be considered. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 12: In individuals with 
iron-deficiency anemia secondary to gastric antral vascular ectasia who have an 
inadequate response to iron replacement, consider endoscopic therapy with 
endoscopic band ligation or thermal methods such as argon plasma coagulation. 
BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 13: In patients with iron-deficiency anemia and celiac 
disease, ensure adherence to a gluten-free diet to improve iron absorption. 
Consider oral iron supplementation based on the severity of iron deficiency and 
patient tolerance, followed by intravenous iron therapy if iron stores do not 
improve. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 14: Deep enteroscopy performed in patients with 
iron-deficiency anemia suspected to have small-bowel bleeding angioectasias 
should be performed with a distal attachment to improve detection and facilitate 
treatment. Small-bowel angioectasias may be treated with ablative thermal 
therapies such as argon plasma coagulation or with mechanical methods such as 
hemostatic clips. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 15: Endoscopic treatment of angioectasias 
should be accompanied with iron replacement. Medical therapy for small-bowel 
angioectasias should be reserved for compassionate treatment in refractory cases 
when iron replacement and endoscopic therapy are ineffective.

Copyright © 2024 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cgh.2024.03.046
PMID: 38864796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Chest. 2021 Nov;160(5):e513-e518. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2021.06.045.

A 56-Year-Old Man With Emphysema, Rash, and Arthralgia.

Goel K(1), Maleki-Fischbach M(2), George MP(3), Kim D(4), Richards J(5), Wise 
RA(6), Serban KA(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care 
Medicine, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO; Department of Medicine, Division 
of Pulmonary and Critical Care, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO. Electronic 
address: khushboo.goel@cuanschutz.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, National Jewish Health, 
Denver, CO.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, National 
Jewish Health, Denver, CO.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, National Jewish Health, 
Denver, CO.
(5)Department of Radiology, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Johns 
Hopkins, Baltimore, MD.
(7)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care 
Medicine, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO; Department of Medicine, Division 
of Pulmonary and Critical Care, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO.

A 56-year-old man presented to the pulmonary clinic with dyspnea and hypoxemia 
on exertion. He was an avid biker and skier who had noticed a significant 
decrease in high-level physical activity over the past 3 years. He reported 
dyspnea, desaturations at altitudes higher than 9,000 feet, dry cough, 
tachycardia, and palpitations with exercise. Review of systems was also notable 
for gluten-intolerance, Raynaud's phenomenon, recurrent skin lesions and joint 
swelling, pain, and stiffness in the areas overlying the jaw, wrists, knees, and 
ankles (after capsaicin exposure). He denied fever, chills, anorexia, weight 
loss, hair loss, ocular symptoms, jaw claudication, chest pain, or lower 
extremity swelling. He had a five pack-year smoking history, no history of 
prematurity, childhood asthma, recurrent infections, or environmental and 
occupational exposure. Based on pulmonary function tests from an outside 
provider, he had received a diagnosis of exercise-induced asthma and had been 
prescribed an albuterol inhaler to use on an as-needed basis, which failed to 
improve his symptoms. He was later prescribed a mometasone-formoterol inhaler, 
still with no symptomatic improvement.

Copyright © 2021 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2021.06.045
PMCID: PMC8727885
PMID: 34743855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Asia Ocean J Nucl Med Biol. 2021 Winter;9(1):51-55. doi: 
10.22038/AOJNMB.2020.49000.1333.

Incidentally Detected Celiac Disease with Splenomegaly on (18)F FDG PET/CT: A 
Potential Lymphoma Mimic.

Panda A(1), McCarthy MR(2), Murray JA(3), Sharain RF(2), Shi M(2), Kendi AT(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Departments of Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(3)Departments of Gastroenterology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Celiac disease is an immune-mediated disorder triggered by hypersensitivity to 
gluten occurring in genetically susceptible individuals. A high-index of 
suspicion is needed for diagnosis as patients can be asymptomatic or present 
with atypical symptoms or extra-intestinal manifestations. Typical 
18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) Positron Emission Tomography (PET)/Computed 
Tomography (CT) gastrointestinal manifestations of celiac disease include 
increased multifocal or diffuse jejunal and ileal uptake; focal duodenal uptake 
is less common. Splenomegaly with increased splenic FDG uptake is also uncommon 
in celiac disease in the absence of portal hypertension; small-sized spleen and 
functional hyposplenism are more typical. We report a case of celiac disease 
diagnosed after PET/CT showed FDG uptake in the duodenum and enlarged spleen. 
Follow-up after gluten-free diet showed complete metabolic resolution and 
regression of splenomegaly. The combination of focal bowel and splenic uptake is 
unusual in celiac disease and may be mistaken for a lymphoproliferative 
disorder. Awareness of this entity may avoid misdiagnosis and guide appropriate 
management.

© 2021 mums.ac.ir All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.22038/AOJNMB.2020.49000.1333
PMCID: PMC7701229
PMID: 33392350


5. Rev Gastroenterol Mex (Engl Ed). 2020 Apr-Jun;85(2):109-117. doi: 
10.1016/j.rgmx.2019.02.002. Epub 2019 Apr 15.

Metabolic effects in patients with celiac disease, patients with nonceliac 
gluten sensitivity, and asymptomatic controls, after six months of a gluten-free 
diet.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Remes-Troche JM(1), Cobos-Quevedo OJ(2), Rivera-Gutiérrez X(2), Hernández G(2), 
de la Cruz-Patiño E(2), Uscanga-Domínquez LF(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Fisiología Digestiva y Motilidad Gastrointestinal, Instituto 
de Investigaciones Medico-Biológicas, Universidad Veracruzana, Veracruz, México. 
Electronic address: jose.remes.troche@gmail.com.
(2)Laboratorio de Fisiología Digestiva y Motilidad Gastrointestinal, Instituto 
de Investigaciones Medico-Biológicas, Universidad Veracruzana, Veracruz, México.
(3)Departamento de Gastroenterología, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y 
Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Ciudad de México, México.

Comment in
    Rev Gastroenterol Mex (Engl Ed). 2020 Apr - Jun;85(2):107-108. doi: 
10.1016/j.rgmx.2020.01.001.
    Rev Gastroenterol Mex (Engl Ed). 2020 Jul - Sep;85(3):373-374. doi: 
10.1016/j.rgmx.2020.04.005.

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: It is essential for patients with celiac disease 
(CD) to be on a gluten-free diet (GFD) but said diet has also been reported to 
increase the risk for metabolic syndrome. There is no evidence on the metabolic 
effects of a GFD in patients with nonceliac gluten sensitivity (NCGS) or in 
asymptomatic subjects. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to evaluate 
the metabolic effects of a GFD over a 6-month period in patients with CD, 
patients with NCGS, and in asymptomatic controls (ACs).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A prospective study was conducted that evaluated 
metabolic syndrome and its components of obesity, high blood pressure, hepatic 
steatosis, and hyperglycemia at the baseline and at 6 months.
RESULTS: A total of 66 subjects (22 CD, 22 NCGS, and 22 AC) were included in the 
study. At the baseline, 10% of the patients with CD presented with obesity, high 
blood pressure, hepatic steatosis, and metabolic syndrome. After 6 months, 
obesity and metabolic syndrome increased by 20% (p=0.125). In the patients with 
NCGS, obesity increased by 5% after the GFD and 20% of those patients presented 
with de novo hepatic steatosis. The prevalence of obesity decreased by 10% in 
the controls after the GFD (30 vs 20%, p=0.5) and none of the other components 
of metabolic syndrome were affected.
CONCLUSIONS: The metabolic benefits and risks of a GFD should be considered when 
prescribing said diet in the different populations that opt for that type of 
intervention.

Copyright © 2019 Asociación Mexicana de Gastroenterología. Publicado por Masson 
Doyma México S.A. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rgmx.2019.02.002
PMID: 31000461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Jun;59(6):1255-61. doi: 10.1007/s10620-013-2981-6. Epub 2013
 Dec 28.

Characteristics of patients who avoid wheat and/or gluten in the absence of 
Celiac disease.

Tavakkoli A(1), Lewis SK, Tennyson CA, Lebwohl B, Green PH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Celiac Disease Center, Columbia University, 180 Fort 
Washington Avenue, Suite 936, New York, NY, 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Jun;59(6):1080-2. doi: 10.1007/s10620-014-3083-9.

BACKGROUND: Gastrointestinal symptoms that respond to the removal of wheat 
and/or gluten are becoming more common. Patients who avoid wheat and/or gluten 
(PWAWG) are a heterogeneous group and predominantly self-diagnosed prior to 
presenting for clinical evaluation.
SPECIFIC AIM: We characterized PWAWGs seen at a tertiary care referral center 
and compared them to patients with celiac disease (CD) and subjects in the 
National Health and Nutrition examination survey (NHANES).
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study evaluating patients seen by four 
gastroenterologists at a CD referral center. Baseline characteristics, 
laboratory values, and medical comorbidities were compared to CD patients who 
presented at the same center and subjects enrolled in NHANES.
RESULTS: Eighty-four PWAWGs were identified and compared to 585 CD patients and 
2,686 NHANES patients. Thirty-two alternative diagnoses were made in 25 (30%) 
PWAWGs, including small intestinal bacterial overgrowth and fructose/lactose 
intolerance. When compared to patients with CD, PWAWGs had similar body mass 
index (BMI, 23.1 vs. 23.5, p = 0.54) and mean hemoglobin value (13.4 vs. 13.3, p 
= 0.6). When compared to male and female patients in NHANES, BMI, folate, and 
mean hemoglobin values were lower in PWAWGs. Both male and female PWAWGs had a 
lower prevalence of hypertension.
CONCLUSION: While there are similarities between CD and PWAWGs that could 
possibly be due to shared HLA haplotypes or an effect of the gluten-free diet, 
alternative diagnoses are common in these patients. PWAWGs have a similar 
cardiovascular profile as CD patients in terms of lower BMI and lower prevalence 
of hypertension.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-013-2981-6
PMID: 24374645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J AOAC Int. 2012 Jan-Feb;95(1):206-15. doi: 10.5740/jaoacint.11-042.

Validation of a new enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay to detect the triggering 
proteins and peptides for celiac disease: interlaboratory study.

Mujico JR(1), Dekking L, Kooy-Winkelaar Y, Verheijen R, van Wichen P, Streppel 
L, Sajic N, Drijfhout JW, Koning F.

Author information:
(1)Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Immunology and Blood 
Transfusion, Leiden, The Netherlands. jrmujico@gmail.com

The performance of Gluten-Tec (EuroProxima, Arnhem, The Netherlands) was tested 
through an interlaboratory study in accordance with AOAC guidelines. Gluten-Tec 
is a competitive ELISA that detects an immunostimulatory epitope of a-gliadin in 
dietary food for celiacs. Fifteen laboratories, representing 14 different 
countries, announced their interest in taking part in this study. Of the 12 
laboratories that sent the results within the established timeframe, two 
submitted inappropriate standard curves and were excluded from the statistical 
analysis. Four different food matrixes (rice-based baby food, maize bread, 
chocolate cake mix, and beer) were selected for preparing the test samples. Two 
gliadin extraction procedures were used: the conventional 60% ethanol, and a new 
method based on the reducing reagent dithiothreitol. The 38 samples (19 blind 
duplicates) tested in this study were prepared by diluting the different 
extracts in order to cover a wide range of gliadin levels. Both sample 
extraction and dilution were performed by EuroProxima; the present 
interlaboratory study was focused only on testing the ELISA part of the 
Gluten-Tec kit protocol. Repeatability values (within-laboratory variance), 
expressed as RSD(r) ranged from 6.2 to 25.7%, while reproducibility values 
(interlaboratory variance), expressed as RSD(R), ranged from 10.6 to 45.9%. Both 
statistical parameters were in the acceptable range of ELISAs under these 
conditions, and the method will be presented to the Codex Alimentarius as a 
preferred method for gluten analysis.

DOI: 10.5740/jaoacint.11-042
PMID: 22468361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Eur Ann Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007 Feb;39(2):45-50.

GliSODin, a vegetal sod with gliadin, as preventative agent vs. atherosclerosis, 
as confirmed with carotid ultrasound-B imaging.

Cloarec M(1), Caillard P, Provost JC, Dever JM, Elbeze Y, Zamaria N.

Author information:
(1)Association Nationale de Prevention Médicale, 14, rue de l'Abbé Grégoire, 
F-75005 Paris.

Prevention of cardiovascular disease should target high-risk subjects based on 
genetic/familial factors, blood chemistry, blood pressure, body mass index 
(BMI), and a history of/or current cigarette smoking. We selected active adults 
(n=76) aged 30-60 and investigated these risk factors, in order to recommend 
preventive measures. Another interesting variable is the preclinical status or 
atheroma of the arterial (carotid) wall or lumen. We also investigated the 
presence of oxidative stress in, and the anti-oxidant status of these subjects. 
We studied the anti-oxidative efficacy of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and 
variations of malondialdehyde (MDA). Supplementation with GliSODin, a vegetal 
SOD associated with gliadin, was effective in controlling the thickness of the 
carotid artery intima and media layers as measured by ultrasonography-B. We 
could demonstrate the preventive efficacy of GliSODin at a preclinical stage in 
subjects with risk factors of cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 17441415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]