1. Acta Clin Belg. 2019 Oct;74(5):375-377. doi: 10.1080/17843286.2018.1535927.
Epub  2018 Oct 16.

Allergic myocardial infarction: Type I Kounis syndrome following blue crab 
consumption.

Dogan V(1), Çelik O(1), Özlek B(1), Özlek E(1), Çil C(1), Başaran Ö(1), Biteker 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine, Mugla Sitki Kocman University 
, Muğla , Turkey.

Objectives: Allergic myocardial infarction, known as Kounis syndrome, is an 
acute myocardial infarction after an allergic reaction to food, drugs, or insect 
stings, etc. Kounis syndrome can also be caused by all kinds of seafood, such as 
finned fish, molluscan shellfish, cephalopods, and crustacean shellfish. 
Methods: Herein, we report a case of a 67-year-old man, with hypertension, 
referred for itchiness, facial rash, chest pain, and palpitations developed 
after consumption of blue crab. Results: Electrocardiogram showed ST elevations 
in leads II,III,aVF. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed inferior wall 
hypokinezia with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 55%. Coronary 
angiography revealed no sign of atherosclerosis. The patient was diagnosed to 
have Kounis Syndrome type I variant, secondary to blue crab ingestion. He was 
treated with oral antihistamines and prednisolone.The repeated cardiac markers 
were within normal limits, with resolution of electrocardiographic abnormalities 
and inferior wall motion echocardiographic changes. Conclusion: All patients 
admitted to the emergency department with chest pain and ST elevation on 
electrocardiography should be asked about allergic insults.

DOI: 10.1080/17843286.2018.1535927
PMID: 30325266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Acta Clin Belg. 2017 Apr;72(2):142-145. doi: 10.1080/17843286.2016.1265756.
Epub  2016 Dec 20.

Kounis syndrome following canned tuna fish ingestion.

De Gennaro L(1), Brunetti ND(2), Locuratolo N(1), Ruggiero M(1), Resta M(1), 
Diaferia G(3), Rana M(3), Caldarola P(1).

Author information:
(1)a Cardiology Department , Ospedale S. Paolo , Bari , Italy.
(2)b Department of Medical & Surgical Sciences , University of Foggia , Foggia , 
Italy.
(3)c Cardiology Department , Ospedale Caduti di Tutte le Guerre , Canosa , 
Italy.

Comment in
    Acta Clin Belg. 2017 Oct;72(5):297-299. doi: 10.1080/17843286.2016.1265737.

Kounis syndrome (KS) is a complex of cardiovascular symptoms and signs following 
either allergy or hypersensitivity and anaphylactic or anaphylactoid insults. We 
report the case of 57-year-old man, with hypertension and history of allergy, 
referred for facial rash and palpitations appeared after consumption of canned 
tuna fish. Suddenly, the patient collapsed: electrocardiogram showed 
ST-elevation in inferior leads. The patient was transferred from the spoke 
emergency room for coronary angio, which did not show any sign of coronary 
atherosclerosis. A transient coronary spasm was therefore hypothesized and the 
final diagnosis was KS. To the best of our knowledge, this is one of the first 
cases of KS following the ingestion of tuna fish. KS secondary to food allergy 
has also been reported, and shellfish ingestion has been considered as one of 
the most active KS inducer foods. Canned tuna fish too is well known as an 
allergy inducer. Tuna fish allergy should be considered, however, within the 
context of scombroid food poisoning, also called histamine fish poisoning. Fish 
with high levels of free histidine, the enzyme substrate converted to histamine 
by bacterial histidine decarboxylase, are those most often implicated in 
scombroid poisoning. Inflammatory mediators such as histamine constitute the 
pathophysiologic basis of Kounis hypersensitivity-associated acute coronary 
syndrome. Patients with coronary risk factors, allergic reaction after food 
ingestion, and suspected scombroid poisoning should be therefore carefully 
monitored for a prompt diagnosis of possible coronary complications.

DOI: 10.1080/17843286.2016.1265756
PMID: 27997286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 1996 Sep-Oct;7(5):713-5. doi: 
10.1016/s1051-0443(96)70836-9.

Contraindications to pulmonary angiography.

[No authors listed]

DOI: 10.1016/s1051-0443(96)70836-9
PMID: 8897339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]