1. Nutrients. 2020 Jul 29;12(8):2277. doi: 10.3390/nu12082277.

Beneficial Effects of a Low-Nickel Diet on Relapsing IBS-Like and 
Extraintestinal Symptoms of Celiac Patients during a Proper Gluten-Free Diet: 
Nickel Allergic Contact Mucositis in Suspected Non-Responsive Celiac Disease.

Borghini R(1), De Amicis N(1), Bella A(2), Greco N(1), Donato G(1), Picarelli 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational and Precision Medicine, Sapienza University, 
00185 Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 00161 Rome, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Nickel (Ni)-rich foods can induce allergic contact mucositis 
(ACM) with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)-like symptoms in predisposed subjects. 
Ni ACM has a high prevalence (>30%) in the general population and can be 
diagnosed by a Ni oral mucosa patch test (omPT). Many celiac disease (CD) 
patients on a gluten-free diet (GFD) often show a recrudescence of 
gastrointestinal and extraintestinal symptoms, although serological and 
histological remission has been achieved. Since a GFD often results in higher 
loads of ingested alimentary Ni (e.g., corn), we hypothesized that it would lead 
to a consequent intestinal sensitization to Ni in predisposed subjects. We 
wanted to (1) study Ni ACM prevalence in still symptomatic CD patients on a GFD 
and (2) study the effects of a low-Ni diet (LNiD) on their recurrent symptoms.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We recruited 102 consecutive CD patients (74 female, 28 
male; age range 18-65 years, mean age 42.3 ± 7.4) on a GFD since at least 12 
months, in current serological and histological remission (Marsh-Oberhuber type 
0-I) who complained of relapsing gastrointestinal and/or extraintestinal 
symptoms.
INCLUSION CRITERIA: presence of at least three gastrointestinal symptoms with a 
score ≥5 on the modified Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale (GSRS) 
questionnaire.
EXCLUSION CRITERIA: IgE-mediated food allergy; history of past or current 
cancer; inflammatory bowel diseases; infectious diseases including Helicobacter 
pylori; lactose intolerance. All patients enrolled underwent Ni omPT and 
followed a LNiD for 3 months. A 24 symptoms questionnaire (GSRS modified 
according to the Salerno Experts' Criteria, with 15 gastrointestinal and 9 
extraintestinal symptoms) was administered at T0 (free diet), T1 (GFD, CD 
remission), T2 (recurrence of symptoms despite GFD), and T3 (GFD + LNiD) for 
comparisons. Comparisons were performed using Wilcoxon signed-rank test.
RESULTS: Twenty patients (all female, age range 23-65 years, mean age 39.1 ± 
2.9) out of 102 (19.6%) were finally included. All 20 patients enrolled (100%) 
showed positive Ni omPT, confirming an Ni ACM diagnosis. A correct GFD (T0 vs. 
T1) induced the improvement of 19 out of the total 24 (79.2%) symptoms, and 14 
out of 24 (58.3%) were statistically significant (p-value < 0.0083 according to 
Bonferroni correction). Prolonged GFD (T1 vs. T2) revealed the worsening of 20 
out of the total 24 (83.3%) symptoms, and 10 out of 24 (41.7%) were 
statistically significant. LNiD (T2 vs. T3) determined an improvement of 20 out 
of the total 24 (83.4%) symptoms, and in 10 out of 24 (41.7%) symptoms the 
improvement was statistically significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that the recrudescence of gastrointestinal and 
extraintestinal symptoms observed in CD subjects during GFD may be due to the 
increase in alimentary Ni intake, once gluten contamination and persisting 
villous atrophy are excluded. Ni overload can induce Ni ACM, which can be 
diagnosed by a specific Ni omPT. Improvement of symptoms occurs after a proper 
LNiD. These encouraging data should be confirmed with larger studies.

DOI: 10.3390/nu12082277
PMCID: PMC7468824
PMID: 32751300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


2. Mol Cells. 2019 Apr 30;42(4):313-320. doi: 10.14348/molcells.2019.2431.

Microbial Colonization at Early Life Promotes the Development of Diet-Induced 
CD8αβ Intraepithelial T Cells.

Jung J(1)(2), Surh CD(1)(2)(3), Lee YJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Academy of Immunology and Microbiology, Institute for Basic Science (IBS), 
Pohang 37673, Korea.
(2)Division of Integrative Biosciences & Biotechnology, Pohang University of 
Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang 37673, Korea.
(3)Division of Developmental Immunology, La Jolla Institute for Allergy & 
Immunology, CA 92037, USA.

Intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs) develop through the continuous interaction 
with intestinal antigens such as commensal microbiome and diet. However, their 
respective roles and mutual interactions in the development of IELs are largely 
unknown. Here, we showed that dietary antigens regulate the development of the 
majority of CD8αβ IELs in the small intestine and the absence of commensal 
microbiota particularly during the weaning period, delay the development of 
IELs. When we tested specific dietary components, such as wheat or combined 
corn, soybean and yeast, they were dependent on commensal bacteria for the 
timely development of diet-induced CD8αβ IELs. In addition, supplementation of 
intestinal antigens later in life was inefficient for the full induction of 
CD8αβ IELs. Overall, our findings suggest that early exposure to commensal 
bacteria is important for the proper development of dietary antigen-dependent 
immune repertoire in the gut.

DOI: 10.14348/molcells.2019.2431
PMCID: PMC6530640
PMID: 30841027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Healthcare (Basel). 2017 Apr 26;5(2):21. doi: 10.3390/healthcare5020021.

Irritable Bowel Syndrome: Clinical Manifestations, Dietary Influences, and 
Management.

Ikechi R(1), Fischer BD(2), DeSipio J(3), Phadtare S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cooper Medical School of Rowan University, 
Camden, NJ 08103, USA. ikechir0@rowan.edu.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cooper Medical School of Rowan University, 
Camden, NJ 08103, USA. fischerb@rowan.edu.
(3)Department of Medicine, Gastroenterology/Liver Diseases Division, Cooper 
Medical School of Rowan University, Camden, NJ 08103, USA. 
DeSipio-Joshua@CooperHealth.edu.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cooper Medical School of Rowan University, 
Camden, NJ 08103, USA. phadtare@rowan.edu.

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a functional gastrointestinal disorder that is 
characterized by symptoms of chronic abdominal pain and altered bowel habits in 
the absence of an overtly identifiable cause. It is the most commonly diagnosed 
functional gastrointestinal disorder, accounting for about one third of 
gastroenterology visits. It generally presents as a complex of symptoms, 
including psychological dysfunction. Hypersensitivity to certain foods, 
especially foods that contain high amounts of fructose, plays a role in the 
pathophysiology of IBS. Elevated consumption of high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS) 
has been discussed in this aspect. The treatment options for IBS are challenging 
and varied. In addition to dietary restrictions for HFCS-induced IBS, such as 
low-FODMAP (Fermentable Oligosaccharides, Disaccharide, Monosaccharides, and 
Polyols) diets, existing drug therapies are administered based on the 
predominant symptoms and IBS-subtype. Patients with IBS are likely to suffer 
from issues, such as anxiety, depression, and post-traumatic-stress disorder. 
Biopsychosocial factors particularly socioeconomic status, sex, and race should, 
thus, be considered for diagnostic evaluation of patients with IBS.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare5020021
PMCID: PMC5492024
PMID: 28445436

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


4. Clin Exp Allergy. 2007 Jun;37(6):823-30. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2222.2007.02727.x.

Alterations of food antigen-specific serum immunoglobulins G and E antibodies in 
patients with irritable bowel syndrome and functional dyspepsia.

Zuo XL(1), Li YQ, Li WJ, Guo YT, Lu XF, Li JM, Desmond PV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, 
China.

Comment in
    Clin Exp Allergy. 2007 Jun;37(6):805-7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2222.2007.02736.x.

BACKGROUND: Post-prandial worsening of symptoms as well as adverse reactions to 
one or more foods are common in the patients with functional gastrointestinal 
diseases, such as irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and functional dyspepsia (FD). 
However, the role played by true food allergy in the pathogenesis of these 
diseases is still controversial and there are no well-established tests to 
identify food allergy in this condition.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate serum food antigen-specific IgG, IgE antibody and 
total IgE antibody titres in controls and patients with IBS and FD, and to 
correlate symptoms with the food antigen-specific IgG titres in IBS and FD 
patients.
METHODS: Thirty-seven IBS patients, 28 FD patients and 20 healthy controls 
participated in this study. Serum IgG and IgE antibody titres to 14 common foods 
including beef, chicken, codfish, corn, crab, eggs, mushroom, milk, pork, rice, 
shrimp, soybean, tomatoes and wheat were analysed by ELISA. Serum total IgE 
titres were also measured. Last, symptomatology was assessed in the study. 
Results IBS patients had significantly higher titres of IgG antibody to crab 
(P=0.000), egg (P=0.000), shrimp (P=0.000), soybean (P=0.017) and wheat 
(P=0.004) than controls. FD patients had significantly higher titres of IgG 
antibody to egg (P=0.000) and soybean (P=0.017) than controls. The percentage of 
individuals with detectable positive food antigen-specific IgE antibodies of the 
three groups did not show any significant differences (P=0.971). There were no 
significant differences between IBS patients, FD patients and controls in the 
serum total IgE antibody titres (P=0.978). Lastly, no significant correlation 
was seen between symptom severity and serum food antigen-specific IgG antibody 
titres both in IBS and FD patients.
CONCLUSION: Serum IgG antibody titres to some common foods increased in IBS and 
FD patients compared to controls. But there is no significant correlation 
between symptom severity and elevated serum food antigen-specific IgG antibodies 
in these patients.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2007.02727.x
PMID: 17517095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]