1. Nutrients. 2025 Apr 16;17(8):1359. doi: 10.3390/nu17081359.

Food Hypersensitivity: Distinguishing Allergy from Intolerance, Main 
Characteristics, and Symptoms-A Narrative Review.

Hage G(1)(2), Sacre Y(1), Haddad J(2)(3), Hajj M(2), Sayegh LN(4), 
Fakhoury-Sayegh N(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Holy 
Spirit University of Kaslik, Jounieh P.O. Box 446, Lebanon.
(2)Hajj Medical Center-Medical & Dental Clinics, Green Zone A Building 71 Ground 
Floor, Naccache P.O. Box 1201, Lebanon.
(3)Faculty of Dental Medicine, Saint Joseph University of Beirut, Medical 
Sciences Campus, Damascus Road, Riad Solh, Beirut P.O. Box 11-5076, Lebanon.
(4)Yale New Haven Hospital, P.O. Box 1880, 20 York Street, New Haven, CT 06510, 
USA.
(5)Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Nutrition, Saint Joseph University of 
Beirut, Medical Sciences Campus, Damascus Road, Riad Solh, Beirut P.O. Box 
11-5076, Lebanon.

Background/Objectives: Food hypersensitivity remains an understudied and 
overlooked subject globally. It is characterized by adverse reactions to dietary 
substances, potentially triggered by various mechanisms. Food allergy, a subset 
of food hypersensitivity, denotes an immune response to food proteins 
categorized into immunoglobulin IgE-mediated or non-IgE-mediated reactions. 
Conversely, food intolerance, another facet of food hypersensitivity, refers to 
non-immunological reactions, in which the human body cannot properly digest 
certain foods or components, leading to gastrointestinal discomfort and other 
non-immune-related symptoms. The main objective of this study was to determine 
and differentiate the differences, characteristics, and types of food 
hypersensitivity. Methods: This study involved a comprehensive review of key 
research from 1990 onward, including review articles, prospective studies, 
nested case-control studies, and meta-analyses. Results: Recognizing these 
differences is essential for healthcare professionals to ensure accurate 
diagnosis, effective management, and improved patient outcomes, while also 
aiding dietitians in providing optimal nutritional and dietary guidance. 
Conclusions: there are big differences between the main characteristics, such as 
symptoms, complications, and treatments between allergies, and food 
intolerances. Commonly reported trigger foods include cow milk, gluten, eggs, 
nuts, and seafood.

DOI: 10.3390/nu17081359
PMCID: PMC12029945
PMID: 40284223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.