1. Nutrients. 2023 Nov 30;15(23):4969. doi: 10.3390/nu15234969.

Myths and Facts about Food Intolerance: A Narrative Review.

Zingone F(1)(2), Bertin L(1)(2), Maniero D(1), Palo M(1), Lorenzon G(1), 
Barberio B(2), Ciacci C(3), Savarino EV(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Oncology and Gastroenterology, University of Padua, 
35124 Padua, Italy.
(2)Gastroenterology Unit, Azienda Ospedale-Università Padova, 35128 Padua, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry, Scuola Medica Salernitana, 
University of Salerno, 84081 Salerno, Italy.

Most adverse reactions to food are patient self-reported and not based on 
validated tests but nevertheless lead to dietary restrictions, with patients 
believing that these restrictions will improve their symptoms and quality of 
life. We aimed to clarify the myths and reality of common food intolerances, 
giving clinicians a guide on diagnosing and treating these cases. We performed a 
narrative review of the latest evidence on the widespread food intolerances 
reported by our patients, giving indications on the clinical presentations, 
possible tests, and dietary suggestions, and underlining the myths and reality. 
While lactose intolerance and hereditary fructose intolerance are based on 
well-defined mechanisms and have validated diagnostic tests, non-coeliac gluten 
sensitivity and fermentable oligosaccharide, disaccharide, monosaccharide, and 
polyol (FODMAP) intolerance are mainly based on patients' reports. Others, like 
non-hereditary fructose, sorbitol, and histamine intolerance, still need more 
evidence and often cause unnecessary dietary restrictions. Finally, the main 
outcome of the present review is that the medical community should work to 
reduce the spread of unvalidated tests, the leading cause of the problematic 
management of our patients.

DOI: 10.3390/nu15234969
PMCID: PMC10708184
PMID: 38068827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


2. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2024 Mar;12(3):607-619. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2023.09.027. Epub 2023 Sep 30.

Nonallergic Diseases Associated With Foods.

Patel PK(1), Tanpowpong P(2), Sriaroon P(1), Lockey RF(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Medicine, Johns Hopkins All Children's Hospital, St 
Petersburg, Fla; Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, Fla.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine 
Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, Fla. Electronic 
address: rlockey@usf.edu.

Clinicians are faced with evaluating real and alleged reactions to foods that 
may be allergic or nonallergic. Pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment of 
various non-IgE-mediated diseases are discussed in this review. These 
food-related conditions range from mild to severe. Referral for an allergy 
workup may be pursued despite the lack of IgE-mediated symptoms. Diagnostic 
testing is available for defined non-IgE-mediated food diseases that are either 
immunologic or nonimmunologic. These include celiac disease and related 
disorders, carbohydrate maldigestion, pancreatic insufficiency, and histamine 
intolerance. In contrast, there is a paucity of definitive studies to prove food 
intolerance diseases. There are no definitive diagnostic criteria or testing for 
nonceliac gluten sensitivity. Functional gastrointestinal disorders, such as 
irritable bowel syndrome, are better stratified diagnostically but still lack 
reliable testing. Both nonceliac gluten sensitivity and irritable bowel syndrome 
are linked to dietary triggers including fermentable oligosaccharides, 
disaccharides, monosaccharides, and polyols. Therefore, dietary alteration alone 
may be diagnostic and therapeutic when all other conditions are ruled out. These 
conditions are important considerations when evaluating a patient with history 
of a food reaction. There is little evidence that foods are causative in other 
ailments such as acne, migraines, and nasal congestion and hypersecretion.

Copyright © 2023 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2023.09.027
PMID: 37783385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Internist (Berl). 2022 Mar;63(3):281-290. doi: 10.1007/s00108-021-01257-w.
Epub  2022 Feb 9.

[Food sensitivities of the digestive tract-Part 2: Food intolerances].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Bischoff SC(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Ernährungsmedizin, Universität Hohenheim, Fruwirthstr. 12, 
70593, Stuttgart, Deutschland. bischoff.stephan@uni-hohenheim.de.

Adverse reactions to food affect about one third of the population. They are 
based on very different mechanisms and are triggered by specific foods. They are 
divided into food intolerances, which manifest mainly in the gastrointestinal 
tract and food allergies, which can also cause extraintestinal symptoms and have 
an immunological genesis. In adults, food intolerances are significantly more 
common than food allergies with a prevalence of approximately 10-20%. The most 
important food intolerances are sugar intolerances, such as lactose and fructose 
intolerance but intolerances to wheat also play an increasing role. The 
diagnostics of food intolerances require extensive exclusion diagnostics, 
whereby in particular irritable bowel syndrome and intestinal dysbiosis must be 
differentiated. The therapy of food intolerance is primarily based on a targeted 
elimination diet. In this advanced education article the most important food 
intolerances are discussed.

Publisher: Nahrungsmittelunverträglichkeiten (NMU) betreffen etwa ein Drittel 
der Bevölkerung. Sie werden durch umschriebene Nahrungsmittel ausgelöst, wobei 
sehr unterschiedliche Mechanismen zugrunde liegen. NMU werden unterteilt in 
Nahrungsmittelintoleranzen (NMI), die sich vor allem im Gastrointestinaltrakt 
manifestieren, und Nahrungsmittelallergien (NMA), die auch extraintestinal 
Symptome hervorrufen können und eine immunologische Genese haben. Bei 
Erwachsenen sind NMI mit einer Prävalenz von etwa 10–20 % deutlich häufiger als 
NMA. Die wichtigsten NMI sind Zuckerintoleranzen wie Laktose- und 
Fruktoseintoleranz, aber auch Intoleranzen gegen Weizen spielen eine zunehmende 
Rolle. Die Diagnostik von NMI erfordert eine umfangreiche Ausschlussdiagnostik, 
wobei insbesondere das Reizdarmsyndrom und die intestinale Dysbiose abgegrenzt 
werden müssen. Die Therapie der NMI basiert primär auf einer gezielten 
Eliminationsdiät. Im vorliegenden Fortbildungsbeitrag wird auf die wichtigsten 
NMI eingegangen.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00108-021-01257-w
PMID: 35138431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Nutrients. 2021 Dec 21;14(1):2. doi: 10.3390/nu14010002.

Nutrition in Patients with Lactose Malabsorption, Celiac Disease, and Related 
Disorders.

Alkalay MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology 
and Nutrition, University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, TX 75235, USA.

Lactose malabsorption (LM), celiac disease (CD), non-celiac gluten sensitivity 
(NCGS), and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) are conditions associated with food 
triggers, improvement after withdrawal, treatment with dietary restriction, and 
subsequent nutritional detriments. LM occurs when there is incomplete hydrolysis 
of lactose due to lactase deficiency and frequently produces abdominal symptoms; 
therefore, it can cause lactose intolerance (LI). A lactose-restricted diet is 
frequently recommended, although it can potentially lead to nutrient 
deficiencies. Furthermore, lactose is an essential component of fermentable 
oligo-, di-, and monosaccharides and polyols (FODMAPs) and is subsequently 
associated with intolerance to these compounds, especially in IBS. LM commonly 
presents in CD. Nutritional deficits are common in CD and can continue even on a 
gluten-free diet (GFD). Conditions triggered by gluten are known as 
gluten-related disorders (GRDs), including CD, wheat allergy, and NCGS. IBS can 
also be associated with a gluten sensitivity. A GFD is the treatment for CD, 
GRDs, and gluten sensitive IBS, although compliance with this restricted diet 
can be difficult. Strict dietary therapies can have a negative effect on quality 
of life. This review aims to provide an overview of the difficult nutritional 
elements of these disorders, which are critical for medical providers to 
recognize when managing these patients.

DOI: 10.3390/nu14010002
PMCID: PMC8746545
PMID: 35010876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.


5. Nutrients. 2021 Jul 9;13(7):2357. doi: 10.3390/nu13072357.

Living with Food Hypersensitivity as an Adolescent Impairs Health Related 
Quality of Life Irrespective of Disease Severity: Results from a 
Population-Based Birth Cohort.

Jonsson M(1)(2)(3), Ekström S(1)(2), Protudjer JLP(4)(5)(6)(7), Bergström 
A(1)(2), Kull I(3)(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(2)Centre for Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Region Stockholm, 
Solnavägen 4, 113 65 Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Clinical Science and Education, Södersjukhuset, Karolinska 
Institutet, 118 83 Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB R3A 1S1, Canada.
(5)George and Fay Yee Centre for Healthcare Innovation, Winnipeg, MB R3E 0T6, 
Canada.
(6)The Children's Hospital Research Institute of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB R3E 3P4, 
Canada.
(7)The Centre for Allergy Research, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(8)Sachs' Children and Youth Hospital, 118 83 Stockholm, Sweden.

Food hypersensitivity (FHS) refers to food-related symptoms, with or without 
concurrent Immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies related to food(s). It remains 
unclear how different FHS phenotypes affect health-related quality of life 
(HRQoL). We examined self-reported HRQoL (with the generic instrument EQ-5D 
(dimensions and a Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), range 0-100) in association with 
phenotypes of FHS, and food-specific symptoms among adolescents (n = 2990) from 
a population-based birth cohort. Overall, 22% of the adolescents had FHS. 
Compared to adolescents without FHS, those with FHS reported more problems in 
the dimensions of pain/discomfort (p < 0.001), and anxiety/depression (p = 
0.007). Females with FHS reported more problems than males in these dimensions 
(p < 0.001). Different FHS phenotypes (IgE-sensitization, allergic co-morbidity, 
and severity of symptoms) were not associated with differences in HRQoL. EQ-VAS 
scores were lowest for adolescents with symptoms for wheat vs. no wheat, median 
80 vs. 89, p = 0.04) and milk vs. no milk (median 85 vs. 90, p = 0.03). 
Physician-diagnosed lactose intolerance median EQ-VAS was 80 vs. 90, p = 0.03 
and also associated with more problems in the dimension of anxious/depression. 
In conclusion, FHS is associated with lower HRQoL in adolescence, irrespective 
of phenotypes, but differentially affects females vs. males, and those with vs. 
without symptoms for milk or wheat.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13072357
PMCID: PMC8308910
PMID: 34371866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


6. Nutrients. 2021 Feb 9;13(2):575. doi: 10.3390/nu13020575.

Impact of Diet on Symptoms of the Irritable Bowel Syndrome.

Spiller R(1).

Author information:
(1)NIHR Nottingham Biomedical Research Centre, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), with its key features of abdominal pain and 
disturbed bowel habit, is thought by both patients and clinicians to be strongly 
influenced by diet. However, the complexities of diet have made identifying 
specific food intolerances difficult. Eating disorders can masquerade as IBS and 
may need specialist treatment. While typical food allergy is readily 
distinguished from IBS, the mechanisms of gut-specific adverse reactions to food 
are only just being defined. These may include gut-specific mast cell activation 
as well as non-specific activation by stressors and certain foods. Visceral 
hypersensitivity, in some cases mediated by mast cell activation, plays a key 
part in making otherwise innocuous gut stimuli painful. Rapidly fermented poorly 
absorbed carbohydrates produce gaseous distension as well as short-chain fatty 
acids and lowering of colonic pH which may cause symptoms in IBS patients. 
Limiting intake of these in low FODMAP and related diets has proven popular and 
apparently successful in many patients. Existing diet, colonic microbiota and 
their metabolic products may be helpful in predicting who will respond. Wheat 
intolerance may reflect the fact that wheat is often a major source of dietary 
FODMAPs. It may also be either a forme fruste of coeliac disease or non-specific 
immune activation. Wheat exclusion can be successful in some of these patients. 
More research is needed to fully understand the mechanisms of food intolerances 
and how to best ameliorate them in a personalised medicine approach to diet in 
IBS.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13020575
PMCID: PMC7915127
PMID: 33572262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RS has received grant support from Ironwood 
Pharmaceuticals, Zespri International, Sanofi-Aventis and lecture fees from 
Menarini and Alfawasserman.


7. Food Res Int. 2020 Dec;138(Pt B):109780. doi: 10.1016/j.foodres.2020.109780. 
Epub 2020 Oct 15.

Food and food products associated with food allergy and food intolerance - An 
overview.

Muthukumar J(1), Selvasekaran P(1), Lokanadham M(1), Chidambaram R(2).

Author information:
(1)Instrumental and Food Analysis Laboratory, School of Biosciences and 
Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu 632014, India.
(2)Instrumental and Food Analysis Laboratory, School of Biosciences and 
Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu 632014, India. 
Electronic address: cramalingam@vit.ac.in.

Immune-mediated food allergy and non-immune mediated food intolerance are 
categorized as the most common adverse reactions resulting from the ingestion of 
certain foods. As there is no standard treatment, the possible remedy to avoid 
exposure to these adverse reactions is adhering to a strict diet that eliminates 
allergic and intolerant foods. The commonly consumed foods including dairy 
products, egg, fish, shellfish, tree nuts, peanut, soybean, and wheat-based 
products are proven to cause food allergy. Foods containing lactose, gluten, 
high FODMAPs, biogenic amines, and certain food additives leads to potential 
health risks in intolerant individuals. Besides, there are various foods whose 
mechanism of action in triggering food allergy and intolerance is yet to be 
defined. However, the public in-depth understanding of natural foods, processed 
foods, and packaged food products that induce allergic reactions and intolerance 
remains low. Therefore, awareness of diet that partially or completely excludes 
the intake of certain foods associated with these reactions should be widespread 
among the consumers.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodres.2020.109780
PMID: 33288166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. FP Essent. 2018 Sep;472:16-19.

Allergy and Asthma: Food Allergies.

Mehta R(1).

Author information:
(1)Florida Hospital Family Medicine Residency, 133 Benmore Drive, Winter Park, 
FL 32792.

Food allergies are immune-mediated allergic adverse reactions that occur after 
exposure to specific foods. The most commonly recognized food allergies are 
immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated reactions (eg, urticaria, angioedema, 
anaphylaxis) that result from exposure to milk, egg, peanut, tree nuts, 
shellfish, fish, wheat, or soy. However, other foods can cause food allergies. 
Oral allergy syndrome is a common but underrecognized condition characterized by 
transient oropharyngeal symptoms that result from ingestion of uncooked fruits 
or vegetables. Non-IgE-mediated food allergies manifest with more delayed 
symptoms than IgE-mediated food allergies, and predominately cause 
gastrointestinal symptoms. Food allergies often are overreported because they 
may be confused with food intolerances or nonimmunologic adverse food reactions 
(eg, lactose intolerance, food poisoning, caffeine intolerance). Food allergies 
are diagnosed using IgE skin tests, IgE serum tests, or oral food challenge 
tests. These allergies are best managed by avoidance of the food or foods 
related to the allergy because they require ingestion rather than contact to 
precipitate symptoms. Injectable epinephrine should be prescribed for patients 
at risk of anaphylaxis. Careful food label reading and food preparation, 
awareness, and education are keys to prevention.

Written permission from the American Academy of Family Physicians is required 
for reproduction of this material in whole or in part in any form or medium.

PMID: 30152669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Clin Transl Allergy. 2017 Jul 3;7:20. doi: 10.1186/s13601-017-0156-9. 
eCollection 2017.

Health Related Quality of Life among schoolchildren aged 12-13 years in relation 
to food hypersensitivity phenotypes: a population-based study.

Strinnholm Å(1)(2), Hedman L(1)(3), Winberg A(4), Jansson SA(1), Lindh V(2), 
Rönmark E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Occupational and 
Environmental Medicine, OLIN Unit, Umeå University, 901 87 Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Department of Nursing, Umeå University, 901 87 Umeå, Sweden.
(3)Division of Nursing, Department of Health Sciences, Luleå University of 
Technology, 971 87 Luleå, Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences, Pediatrics, Umeå University, 901 87 Umeå, 
Sweden.

BACKGROUND: While Health Related Quality of Life has been investigated among 
children with IgE-mediated food allergy, less is known about quality of life 
among children with other types of hypersensitivity to food. The aim of this 
study was to investigate Health Related Quality of Life (HRQL) in children with 
and without food hypersensitivity. Further, we compared HRQL between children 
with different phenotypes of food hypersensitivity.
METHODS: In a large population-based cohort of schoolchildren in Northern 
Sweden, the parents of 2612 (96% of invited) completed a questionnaire. All 125 
(5%) children who reported complete elimination of milk, egg, fish or wheat due 
to food hypersensitivity were invited to a clinical examination and 94 children 
participated. Of these, 75 children also completed a generic (KIDSCREEN-52) and 
a disease-specific HRQL questionnaire (FAQLQ-TF). Thereafter, these children 
were categorised into the different phenotypes: current food allergy, outgrown 
food allergy, and lactose intolerance. Additionally, 209 children with 
unrestricted diets answered the generic questionnaire.
RESULTS: The median score of all KIDSCREEN-52 domains were above the population 
norm of 50 both in children with and without food hypersensitivity. No 
significant differences in distribution in generic or disease-specific HRQL were 
found between children with or without food hypersensitivity. There were no 
significant differences in HRQL between children with different phenotypes of 
food hypersensitivity. However, children with current food allergy tended to 
have the lowest HRQL. Further, poor HRQL defined as ≥75th percentile for the 
disease specific score was significantly more common in the current food allergy 
phenotype in the domain Emotional impact and the total FAQLQ, compared to the 
other phenotypes.
CONCLUSIONS: In this population-based study, 12-13 year old children reported 
good HRQL regardless of having food hypersensitivity or not. However, the 
children with the current phenotype reported lower HRQL than the other 
phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1186/s13601-017-0156-9
PMCID: PMC5494861
PMID: 28680560


10. Bundesgesundheitsblatt Gesundheitsforschung Gesundheitsschutz. 2016 
Jun;59(6):705-22. doi: 10.1007/s00103-016-2356-1.

[Food Allergy and Intolerance : Distinction, Definitions and Delimitation].

[Article in German]

Kleine-Tebbe J(1), Waßmann-Otto A(2), Mönnikes H(3).

Author information:
(1)Allergie- und Asthma-Zentrum Westend, Praxis Hanf, Ackermann u. Kleine-Tebbe, 
Spandauer Damm 130, Haus 9, 14050, Berlin, Deutschland. 
kleine-tebbe@allergie-experten.de.
(2)Ernährungsberatung und -therapie, Dermatologisches Ambulatorium 
Hamburg-Alstertal, Hamburg, Deutschland.
(3)Martin-Luther-Krankenhaus, Klinik für Innere Medizin, Berlin, Deutschland.

Immunologically mediated hypersensitivity to foods is defined as food allergy, 
mainly due to immunglobulins of class E (IgE) triggering immediate reactions 
(type I hypersensitivity) with possible involvement of mucosa, skin, airways, 
intestinal tract, and the vascular system. Primary food allergy is based on 
(early) IgE sensitization against animal (e. g., cow's milk, hen's eggs) or 
plant proteins (e. g. peanut, hazelnut or wheat). In the case of secondary food 
allergies, IgE against pollen proteins (e. g., birch) reacts to structurally 
related food proteins (with cross-reactions to stone and pit fruits). 
Non-immunological food intolerance reactions are mostly based on carbohydrate 
malassimilation (e. g., lactose intolerance, fructose malabsorption) and are 
rarely due to pseudo-allergies (e. g., flavors, dyes, preservatives) primarily 
in patients with chronic urticaria. Common intestinal symptoms are mainly due to 
functional disorders (e. g., irritable bowel disease), rarely because of 
inflammatory intestinal diseases (e. g., celiac disease). Histamine intolerance, 
gluten hypersensitivity, and so-called food type III hypersensitivities are 
controversial diagnoses. The aforementioned disease entities/models are of 
variable importance for the affected individuals, the public health system, and 
society in general.

DOI: 10.1007/s00103-016-2356-1
PMID: 27215624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]