1. Food Res Int. 2020 Dec;138(Pt B):109780. doi: 10.1016/j.foodres.2020.109780. 
Epub 2020 Oct 15.

Food and food products associated with food allergy and food intolerance - An 
overview.

Muthukumar J(1), Selvasekaran P(1), Lokanadham M(1), Chidambaram R(2).

Author information:
(1)Instrumental and Food Analysis Laboratory, School of Biosciences and 
Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu 632014, India.
(2)Instrumental and Food Analysis Laboratory, School of Biosciences and 
Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu 632014, India. 
Electronic address: cramalingam@vit.ac.in.

Immune-mediated food allergy and non-immune mediated food intolerance are 
categorized as the most common adverse reactions resulting from the ingestion of 
certain foods. As there is no standard treatment, the possible remedy to avoid 
exposure to these adverse reactions is adhering to a strict diet that eliminates 
allergic and intolerant foods. The commonly consumed foods including dairy 
products, egg, fish, shellfish, tree nuts, peanut, soybean, and wheat-based 
products are proven to cause food allergy. Foods containing lactose, gluten, 
high FODMAPs, biogenic amines, and certain food additives leads to potential 
health risks in intolerant individuals. Besides, there are various foods whose 
mechanism of action in triggering food allergy and intolerance is yet to be 
defined. However, the public in-depth understanding of natural foods, processed 
foods, and packaged food products that induce allergic reactions and intolerance 
remains low. Therefore, awareness of diet that partially or completely excludes 
the intake of certain foods associated with these reactions should be widespread 
among the consumers.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodres.2020.109780
PMID: 33288166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2020 Oct;31(7):827-834. doi: 10.1111/pai.13274. Epub 
2020 Jun 17.

Milk allergy most burdensome in multi-food allergic children.

Abrams EM(1)(2), Kim H(3)(4), Gerdts J(5), Protudjer JLP(1)(6)(7)(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, The University of Manitoba, 
Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(2)Division of Allergy & Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(4)McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(5)Food Allergy Canada, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(6)George and Fay Yee Centre for Healthcare Innovation, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(7)The Children's Health Research Institute of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(8)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(9)Centre for Allergy Research, Karolinska Institutet,, Stockholm, Sweden.
(10)Food and Human Nutritional Sciences, The University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
MB, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Food allergy is a substantial health burden, which 
disproportionately affects children. Among children with food allergy, as many 
as 70% have multiple food allergies. Whereas the overall burden of food allergy 
on quality of life has been described, little is known about the burden of 
individual allergens. We aimed to examine the perception of burden among 
families with multiple food-allergic children.
METHODS: Parents of children with 1 + children with multiple food allergies 
including milk responded to online questions, including both open-ended and 
closed-ended questions on food allergy-related burdens of time, financial costs, 
social restrictions, and emotional demands.
RESULTS: Overall, 64 children (69.8% boys) of whom (73.0%) most were aged 10 and 
younger were included. Most had been diagnosed with food allergy in infancy and 
by a (pediatric) allergist. Other common allergies included peanut (65.6%), tree 
nuts (57.8%), egg (76.6%), and sesame (31.3%). Quantitatively, milk allergy was 
reported as carrying the most burden, including most socially limiting (81.5%), 
requiring the most planning (75.9%), causing the most anxiety (68.5%), most 
challenging to find "safe" or allergy-friendly foods (72.2%), and costly 
(81.5%). Qualitatively, we identified five themes that captured burdens 
associated with costs, marketing of milk products to children, risk of 
cross-contamination, ubiquity of milk/dairy and public confusion with lactose 
intolerance, and an unwillingness of others to accommodate the allergy.
CONCLUSION: Parents whose children have multiple food allergies, including milk, 
report milk as the allergy associated with the greatest time, financial, social, 
and emotional burdens.

© 2020 EAACI and John Wiley and Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley and Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pai.13274
PMID: 32413203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. FP Essent. 2018 Sep;472:16-19.

Allergy and Asthma: Food Allergies.

Mehta R(1).

Author information:
(1)Florida Hospital Family Medicine Residency, 133 Benmore Drive, Winter Park, 
FL 32792.

Food allergies are immune-mediated allergic adverse reactions that occur after 
exposure to specific foods. The most commonly recognized food allergies are 
immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated reactions (eg, urticaria, angioedema, 
anaphylaxis) that result from exposure to milk, egg, peanut, tree nuts, 
shellfish, fish, wheat, or soy. However, other foods can cause food allergies. 
Oral allergy syndrome is a common but underrecognized condition characterized by 
transient oropharyngeal symptoms that result from ingestion of uncooked fruits 
or vegetables. Non-IgE-mediated food allergies manifest with more delayed 
symptoms than IgE-mediated food allergies, and predominately cause 
gastrointestinal symptoms. Food allergies often are overreported because they 
may be confused with food intolerances or nonimmunologic adverse food reactions 
(eg, lactose intolerance, food poisoning, caffeine intolerance). Food allergies 
are diagnosed using IgE skin tests, IgE serum tests, or oral food challenge 
tests. These allergies are best managed by avoidance of the food or foods 
related to the allergy because they require ingestion rather than contact to 
precipitate symptoms. Injectable epinephrine should be prescribed for patients 
at risk of anaphylaxis. Careful food label reading and food preparation, 
awareness, and education are keys to prevention.

Written permission from the American Academy of Family Physicians is required 
for reproduction of this material in whole or in part in any form or medium.

PMID: 30152669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Skinmed. 2017 Dec 1;15(6):477-479. eCollection 2017.

Mast Cell Activation Syndrome.

Kramer ON(1), Barkoff MS(2), Hernandez C(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago College of Medicine, Chicago, IL.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, University of Illinois 
at Chicago College of Medicine, Chicago, IL.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL; 
Claudia_Hernandez@rush.edu.

A 51-year-old woman with a history of asthma and Hashimoto's thyroiditis 
presented to the dermatology service with a chief complaint of "itchy bumpy 
rashes" that persisted beyond 24 hours. She noted that, 3 days prior to the 
onset of urticaria, a pyrroloquinoline quinone supplement had been started. The 
urticaria was accompanied by variable episodes of transient facial swelling and 
difficulty breathing. The patient noted that exposure to fish, nuts, and 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs triggered facial swelling. Other reported 
findings included a 5-year history of diarrhea, sense of memory deterioration, 
concentration difficulties, and clinical manifestations of anomic aphasia. 
Although her allergy testing was "negative," she had been given the diagnoses of 
lactose intolerance and gastroesophageal reflux disease. Laboratory studies on 
initial presentation were significant for a positive history of 
antithyroperoxidase antibodies and elevated total complement activity. 
Medications included budesonide/formoterol, fluticasone/salmeterol, 
levothyroxine, albuterol, and fexofenadine 180 mg twice daily. Although her 
"rash" had initially responded to fexofenadine, it soon became refractory to 
treatment. Her family history was significant only for thyroid disease.

PMID: 29282192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2017 Mar-Apr;5(2):358-362. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2016.10.018. Epub 2016 Dec 5.

Food Allergy Trends and Epinephrine Autoinjector Presence in Summer Camps.

Schellpfeffer NR(1), Leo HL(2), Ambrose M(3), Hashikawa AN(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich. 
Electronic address: nschellpfeffer@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Health Behavior and Education, School of Public Health, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, St. Joseph Mercy Hospital, Ann Arbor, Mich.
(4)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich.

BACKGROUND: Pediatric campers with food allergies are at greater risk for 
exposure and anaphylaxis. A diagnosis of asthma increases risk for anaphylaxis. 
Epidemiological investigations of food-allergic children at high risk for 
allergic reactions requiring intervention in camp settings are lacking.
OBJECTIVE: The objectives of this study were to estimate the prevalence of food 
allergies among otherwise healthy campers in summer camps throughout the United 
States and Canada, and to assess asthma comorbidity and determine rates of 
epinephrine autoinjector prescriptions present in this population.
METHODS: We partnered with CampDoc.com, a web-based camp electronic health 
record system. Deidentified data were abstracted from 170 camps representing 
122,424 campers. Only food allergies with a parental report of symptoms 
requiring intervention or with a camp prescription for an epinephrine 
autoinjector were included, whereas gluten, lactose intolerance, and food dyes 
were excluded. Asthma status and epinephrine presence on the camp medication 
list were assessed.
RESULTS: Overall, 2.5% of campers (n = 3055) had documented food allergies. Of 
these campers, 22% had multiple food allergies. Median age was 11 years; 52% 
were female. Nuts (81%), seafood (17.4%), egg (8.5%), fruit (8.1%), and seeds 
(7.2%) were the top 5 food allergies reported. Of food-allergic campers, 44.3% 
had concurrent asthma and 34.7% of those campers were taking multiple asthma 
medications. Less than half (39.7%) of food-allergic children brought an 
epinephrine autoinjector to the camp.
CONCLUSIONS: Life-saving epinephrine is not necessarily available for 
food-allergic children in camp settings. A substantial proportion of 
food-allergic campers are at higher risk for anaphylaxis based on concurrent 
asthma status.

Copyright © 2016 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2016.10.018
PMID: 27923649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Chem Immunol Allergy. 2015;101:51-8. doi: 10.1159/000371669. Epub 2015 May 21.

Food allergy in adolescence and adulthood.

Ballmer-Weber BK(1).

Author information:
(1)Allergy Unit, Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.

In young children, food allergy is usually acquired via the gastrointestinal 
tract and directed toward egg and milk. Adolescent and adult patients, however, 
mainly acquire food allergy via primary sensitization to inhalant allergens on 
the basis of cross-reactivity between proteins in inhalant sources and in food. 
This type of food allergy is frequently mediated by sensitization to broadly 
represented allergens, or so-called panallergens. Food allergic reactions in 
adult patients - similar to those in children - range in severity from very mild 
and local symptoms, as in contact urticaria of the oral mucosa, to systemic 
symptoms involving distal organs, to a fatal outcome. Plant foods, such as 
fruits, nuts, and vegetables, are the most prevalent allergenic foods in this 
age group.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000371669
PMID: 26022864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Pediatr Ann. 2013 Jun 1;42(6):96-101. doi: 10.3928/00904481-20130522-09.

Clinical manifestations of food allergy.

Perry TT(1), Pesek RD.

Author information:
(1)Allergy and Immunology Division, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, 
College of Medicine, Children’s Way, Slot 512-13, Little Rock AR 72202, USA. 
perrytamarat@uams.edu

Adverse reactions to foods are a diverse group of clinical syndromes resulting 
from immunologic and non-immunologic responses to food ingestion. Symptoms can 
range from mild, self-limiting reactions to severe, life-threatening reactions 
depending on the mechanism. This review primarily focuses on the clinical 
manifestations of immunologically derived adverse food reactions or food 
allergies.The true prevalence of food allergy is unknown. Up to 25% of the 
general population believes that they may be allergic to some food; however, the 
actual prevalence of food allergy diagnosed by a provider appears to be 1.5% to 
2% of the adult population and approximately 6% to 8% of children. This 
discrepancy makes it imperative that clinicians are aware of the different food 
allergy syndromes. With a clear understanding of the clinical manifestations of 
food allergies, an accurate diagnosis and treatment plan can be formulated. 
Failing to do so may result in unnecessary dietary restrictions that may 
adversely affect nutritional status, growth, and quality of life.Most food 
allergic reactions are secondary to a limited number of foods, and the most 
common foods causing allergic reactions in children include milk, egg, peanuts, 
tree nuts, and fish. In adolescents and adults, allergies to peanuts, tree nuts, 
fish, and shellfish are most prevalent. Food allergies can result from 
immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated, non-IGE-mediated, or mixed IgE/non-IgE 
mechanisms. The purpose of this review is to discuss the clinical manifestations 
of each of these types of food allergy.

Copyright 2013, SLACK Incorporated.

DOI: 10.3928/00904481-20130522-09
PMID: 23718237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Am Diet Assoc. 2011 Dec;111(12):1877-91. doi: 10.1016/j.jada.2011.09.001.

Adverse food reactions--an emerging issue for adults.

Skypala I(1).

Author information:
(1)Royal Brompton & Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. 
i.skypala@rbht.nhs.uk

Adverse reactions to foods are classified according to the presence or absence 
of involvement of the immune system, which may or may not include the production 
of immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies. This review focuses on the epidemiology, 
diagnosis, and management of adverse food reactions, primarily in adults, and 
excluding celiac disease and lactose intolerance. Reported reactions to foods 
are often believed to be manifestations of a food allergy; however, IgE-mediated 
food allergy only affects 1% to 4% of adults, with seafood, tree nuts, peanuts, 
fruits, and vegetables being the most common triggers. Diagnosis is challenging 
and most commonly achieved through careful evaluation of clinical history 
followed by elimination and reintroduction or challenge with the suspected 
offending food. With acute-onset allergic reactions, estimation of food-specific 
IgE antibodies is frequently used to confirm or refute the diagnosis. Recent 
developments, such as single allergen assays, enhance the diagnosis of 
IgE-mediated food allergy, but the gold standard remains oral food challenge. 
Despite recent advances in the management of food allergy, including the 
promotion of oral tolerance, the mainstay of management is still the avoidance 
of food triggers. Dietary management can be compromised by nutritional 
inadequacy, accidental exposure, food labeling, and quality of life or adherence 
issues. It is essential that adults with confirmed food allergy receive optimal 
nutrition and dietetic support to enable them to manage their condition.

Copyright © 2011 American Dietetic Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jada.2011.09.001
PMID: 22117664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Clin Exp Allergy. 2003 May;33(5):600-6. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2222.2003.01661.x.

Food hypersensitivity among Finnish university students: association with atopic 
diseases.

Mattila L(1), Kilpeläinen M, Terho EO, Koskenvuo M, Helenius H, Kalimo K.

Author information:
(1)The Finnish Student Health Service, Department of Pulmonary Diseases and 
Clinical Allergology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. leena.mattila@yths.fi

BACKGROUND: Food hypersensitivity (FH) is commonly suspected, especially among 
adults with atopic diseases. Symptoms of FH vary from oral allergy syndrome 
(OAS) to gastrointestinal, respiratory and systemic reactions. More data are 
needed regarding patient groups at risk for FH, and symptoms and foods 
responsible for the reactions.
METHODS: FH was studied in 286 Finnish university students. Four study groups 
were selected: subjects (i) with current atopic dermatitis (AD) with or without 
allergic rhinoconjunctivits (ARC) or asthma (n = 41); (ii) with past AD with or 
without ARC or asthma (n = 89); (iii) with ARC or asthma (n = 69); (iv) without 
clinically confirmed atopic disease (n = 87). A thorough clinical examination 
was performed with a questionnaire specifying adverse events to foods. In 
addition, IgE specific to five foods, and skin prick tests to four foods were 
determined.
RESULTS: FH was reported by 172 subjects (60.1%), more often by females (66.3%) 
than by males (47.9%) (P = 0.003). FH was most frequent among subjects with AD, 
among those with current AD in 73.2%, with past AD in 66.3%, and with ARC or 
asthma in 63.8%; 44.8% of subjects without any atopic disease reported FH. Kiwi 
fruit caused symptoms most frequently (38.4%), followed by milk (32.6%), apple 
(29.1%), tomato (27.9%), citrus fruits (25.0%), tree nuts (23.3%), and peanut 
(17.4%). A total of 720 separate symptoms to 25 food items were reported. OAS 
was most common (51.2%), followed by gastrointestinal symptoms (23.5%), 
worsening of AD (11.4%), urticaria (4.2%), rhinitis or conjunctivitis (5.7%) and 
asthma (4.0%). Severe reactions occurred in 3.5% (25/720). Negative IgE and skin 
prick test to foods predicted well negative history, but the value of positive 
test results was limited.
CONCLUSIONS: FH was reported most often by students with current AD and multiple 
atopic diseases. Severe reactions occurred especially in patients with ARC and 
asthma. After excluding lactose intolerance, milk hypersensitivity was 
frequently reported.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2222.2003.01661.x
PMID: 12752588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]