1. Food Sci Nutr. 2024 Oct 9;12(11):9391-9402. doi: 10.1002/fsn3.4494.
eCollection  2024 Nov.

Influence of Brown Rice, Pea, and Soy Proteins on the Physicochemical Properties 
and Sensory Acceptance of Dairy-Free Frozen Dessert.

Hasan T(1)(2), Thoo YY(1), Siow LF(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Science Monash University Malaysia Bandar Sunway Selangor Malaysia.
(2)Department of Food Technology and Nutrition Science Noakhali Science and 
Technology University Noakhali Bangladesh.

Fat and protein derived from milk are prime ingredients in a frozen dessert such 
as ice cream conferring multiple desirable functionalities. However, this frozen 
dairy dessert is not suitable for individuals having lactose intolerance, cow 
milk allergy, or vegans. Hence, the study aimed to formulate dairy-free frozen 
desserts using plant oils and plant proteins and compare their physicochemical 
characteristics and sensory acceptance against an ice cream containing milk fat 
and milk protein. Results indicated that the types of protein significantly 
influenced the physicochemical properties and sensory acceptance of the frozen 
dessert samples. Frozen desserts containing brown rice, pea, and soy protein 
showed greater resistance to melting (0.29, 0.12, and 0.19%/min vs. 1.95%/min), 
but they scored lower in sensory quality than ice cream made with milk protein; 
although they remained at an acceptable level. When compared among the plant 
proteins, the physicochemical characteristics of frozen desserts containing 
brown rice, pea, and soy protein varied because of the differences in the 
respective protein composition. Frozen dessert with brown rice protein showed 
higher overrun (47.50% vs. 40.78% and 37.8%), lower hardness (20.02 N vs. 22.24 
and 26.37 N), and higher melting rate (0.29%/min vs. 0.19 and 0.12%/min) than 
frozen desserts containing soy and pea protein. Additionally, the brown rice 
protein frozen dessert received lower sensory acceptance than soy and pea 
protein frozen desserts. In summary, brown rice, pea, and soy proteins showed 
potential to be used as viable alternatives to milk protein for dairy-free 
frozen dessert applications.

© 2024 The Author(s). Food Science & Nutrition published by Wiley Periodicals 
LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/fsn3.4494
PMCID: PMC11606870
PMID: 39620032

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


2. Nutrients. 2024 Oct 29;16(21):3673. doi: 10.3390/nu16213673.

Probiotic Milk and Oat Beverages with Increased Protein Content: Survival of 
Probiotic Bacteria Under Simulated In Vitro Digestion Conditions.

Pawlos M(1), Szajnar K(1), Znamirowska-Piotrowska A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dairy Technology, Institute of Food Technology and Nutrition, 
College of Natural Sciences, University of Rzeszow, Cwiklinskiej 2D, 35-601 
Rzeszow, Poland.

BACKGROUND: The increasing prevalence of plant-based dietary preferences, driven 
by lactose intolerance, allergies, and adherence to vegan diets, has 
necessitated the exploration of alternative food matrices for probiotic 
delivery.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to evaluate the effects of whey protein isolate, 
pea protein isolate, and soy protein isolate on the viability of L. casei and L. 
johnsonii during simulated in vitro gastrointestinal digestion. Furthermore, the 
study investigated the impact of two distinct matrices-cow's milk and an 
oat-based beverage-on the survival of these probiotic strains. Fermented 
products were prepared using cow's milk and an oat-based beverage as matrices, 
with simulated digestion performed following a seven-day storage period at 5 °C. 
The in vitro digestion model encompassed oral, gastric, and small intestinal 
phases, with probiotic viability assessed using the plate-deep method at each 
stage.
METHODS: Before digestion, L. casei exhibited higher populations than L. 
johnsonii in both matrices. Including 3% soy and pea protein, isolates promoted 
the growth of L. casei in both fermented milk and oat beverages. However, a 
marked reduction in probiotic viability was observed during the gastric phase, 
with L. casei counts decreasing by 6.4-7.8 log cfu g-1 in fermented milk and 
3.1-4 log cfu g-1 in oat beverages, while L. johnsonii demonstrated similar 
reductions.
CONCLUSION: These findings underscore the protective role of dairy components on 
probiotic viability, while the oat-based matrix exhibited a reduced capacity for 
sustaining probiotic populations throughout digestion. Future research should 
focus on optimizing plant-based matrices to enhance probiotic stability during 
gastrointestinal transit.

DOI: 10.3390/nu16213673
PMCID: PMC11547824
PMID: 39519506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


3. Foods. 2024 Jun 30;13(13):2075. doi: 10.3390/foods13132075.

Fortification of Pea and Potato Protein Isolates in Oat-Based Milk Alternatives; 
Effects on the Sensory and Volatile Profile.

McCarron R(1), Methven L(1), Grahl S(2), Elliott R(3), Lignou S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food and Nutritional Sciences, University of Reading, Harry 
Nursten Building, Whiteknights, Reading RG6 6DZ, UK.
(2)Arla Innovation Centre, Agro Food Park 19, 8200 Aarhus N, Denmark.
(3)Department of Nutrition, Food and Exercise Sciences, Faculty of Health and 
Medical Sciences, University of Surrey Guildford, Surrey GU2 7YH, UK.

Oat-based milk alternatives (OMAs) are an important alternative to bovine milk, 
with prevalence of lactose intolerance, as well as soy and nut allergies 
limiting consumers options. However, OMAs are typically lower in protein content 
than both bovine milk and soy-based alternatives, with protein quality limited 
by low lysine levels, which can reduce protein digestibility. Addition of 
alternative plant proteins may increase the quantity of protein, as well as 
balancing the amino acid profile. However, plant-based proteins have additional 
sensory qualities and off-flavours, which may lead to undesirable 
characteristics when introduced to OMAs. This study aimed to assess the effect 
of pea and potato protein addition on the sensory profile, volatile profile, 
colour, and particle size in an OMA control product. Results demonstrated that 
pea protein contributed to a bitter and metallic taste, astringent aftertaste, 
and a significantly increased overall aroma correlated with higher levels of key 
volatiles. Whilst potato protein resulted in less flavour changes, it did lead 
to increased powdery mouthfeel and mouthcoating supported by a substantially 
increased particle size. Both protein fortifications led to detectable colour 
changes and a staler flavour. Fortification of OMA product with the pea protein 
led to significant sensory, volatile and physical changes, whilst the potato 
protein led to predominantly physical changes. Further investigation into 
alternative plant-based proteins is necessary to optimise sensory qualities 
whilst increasing protein content and the amino acid profile.

DOI: 10.3390/foods13132075
PMCID: PMC11241158
PMID: 38998581

Conflict of interest statement: Stephanie Grahl was employed by the company Arla 
Foods amba. She participated in the conceptualisation, supervision of this study 
and writing—reviewing and editing. The remaining authors declare that the 
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


4. Cureus. 2024 May 9;16(5):e59972. doi: 10.7759/cureus.59972. eCollection 2024 
May.

Acute Effects of Dairy or Soy Milk on Sex Hormones Following Resistance Exercise 
in Males: A Randomized, Crossover Pilot Trial.

Craddock JC(1), Wakefield A(1), Peoples GE(1), Goldman DM(2)(3), Larkin TA(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Medical, Indigenous and Health Sciences, Faculty of Science, 
Medicine and Health, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, AUS.
(2)Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, FIN.
(3)Research and Development, Metabite, Inc., New York, USA.
(4)Graduate School of Medicine, Faculty of Science, Medicine and Health, 
University of Wollongong, Wollongong, AUS.

INTRODUCTION: Resistance exercise training (RET) can increase muscle mass and 
strength, and this adaptation is optimized when dietary protein is consumed to 
enhance muscle protein synthesis. Dairy milk has been endorsed for this purpose; 
however, allergy and lactose intolerance affect two-thirds of the global 
population making dairy milk unsuitable for many. Plant-based alternatives such 
as soy milk have gained popularity and exhibit comparable protein content. 
However, concerns regarding soy phytoestrogens potentially influencing 
circulating sex hormones and diminishing the anabolic response to RET have been 
raised. This study therefore aimed to assess the acute effects of dairy and soy 
milk consumption on circulating sex hormones (total, free testosterone, free 
testosterone percentage, total estrogen, progesterone, and sex hormone binding 
globulin) after RET.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Six male participants were recruited for a 
double-blinded, randomized crossover study with either dairy or soy milk 
provided post RET. Venous samples were collected before and after milk 
consumption across seven timepoints (0-120 minutes) where circulating sex 
hormones were analyzed. Two-way ANOVA analyses were applied for repeated 
measures for each hormone. The area under the curve (AUC) was also calculated 
between dairy and soy milk. Significance was set at p<0.05.
RESULTS: No significant differences were observed in acute circulating serum for 
free (p=0.95), % free (p=0.56), and total testosterone (p=0.88), progesterone 
(p=0.67), or estrogen (p=0.21) between milk conditions. Likewise, no significant 
differences in AUC were observed between any hormones.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that consumption of dairy milk and soy milk 
have comparable acute effects on circulating sex hormones following RET. Further 
investigations with expanded sample sizes are needed to strengthen and broaden 
these initial findings.

Copyright © 2024, Craddock et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.59972
PMCID: PMC11162160
PMID: 38854281

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared financial 
relationships, which are detailed in the next section.


5. Front Microbiol. 2023 Sep 25;14:1265188. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1265188. 
eCollection 2023.

Assessing the probiotic potential, antioxidant, and antibacterial activities of 
oat and soy milk fermented with Lactiplantibacillus plantarum strains isolated 
from Tibetan Kefir.

Aziz T(1), Xingyu H(1), Sarwar A(1), Naveed M(2), Shabbir MA(2), Khan AA(3), 
Ulhaq T(3), Shahzad M(4), Zhennai Y(1), Shami A(5), Sameeh MY(6), Alshareef 
SA(7), Tashkandi MA(8), Jalal RS(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Geriatric Nutrition and Health of Ministry of Education, 
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Food Nutrition and Human Health, Beijing 
Engineering and Technology Research Center of Food Additives, Beijing Technology 
and Business University, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of 
Central Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, University of Malakand, Chakdara, Pakistan.
(4)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Khyber Medical University, Peshawar, 
Pakistan.
(5)Department of Biology, College of Science, Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Chemistry Department, Faculty of Applied Sciences, Al-Leith University 
College, Umm Al-Qura University, Makkah, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Department of Biology, College of Science and Arts at Khulis, University of 
Jeddah, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(8)Department of Biochemistry, College of Science, University of Jeddah, Jeddah, 
Saudi Arabia.
(9)Department of Biology, College of Science, University of Jeddah, Jeddah, 
Saudi Arabia.

Sufficient intake of probiotics has been shown to help in the digestion, protect 
the body against pathogenic microorganisms and boost the immune system. 
Recently, due to high prevalence of milk allergies and lactose intolerance in 
population, the non-dairy based probiotic alternative are becoming increasing 
popular. In this context, the oat milk and soya milk-based fermented products 
can be an ideal alternative for the development of Lactic acid bacteria bacteria 
based probiotics. These bacteria can not only improve the product's flavor and 
bioavailability but also increases its antibacterial and antioxidant 
capabilities due to fermentation process. The purpose of the resent work was to 
assess the antioxidant and probiotic properties of oat and soy milk that had 
been fermented with three different strains of Lactiplantibacillus plantarum (L. 
plantarum) including L. plantarum 12-3, L. plantarum K25, and L. plantarum YW11 
isolated from Tibetan Kefir. Different validated assays were used to evaluate 
the probiotic properties, adhesion and survival in the digestive system 
(stomach, acid and bile salts resistance), antioxidant and antimicrobial 
activities and safety (ABTS and DPPH scavenging assays) of these strains. 
Results of the study showed that soya milk and oat milk fermented with L. 
plantarum strains possess promising probiotic, antibacterial and antioxidant 
properties. These results can be helpful to produce dairy-free probiotic 
replacements, which are beneficial for those who are unable to consume dairy 
products due to dietary or allergic restrictions.

Copyright © 2023 Aziz, Xingyu, Sarwar, Naveed, Shabbir, Khan, Ulhaq, Shahzad, 
Zhennai, Shami, Sameeh, Alshareef, Tashkandi and Jalal.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1265188
PMCID: PMC10560984
PMID: 37817753

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


6. Foods. 2023 Jul 11;12(14):2665. doi: 10.3390/foods12142665.

An Updated Review of Soy-Derived Beverages: Nutrition, Processing, and 
Bioactivity.

Olías R(1), Delgado-Andrade C(1), Padial M(1), Marín-Manzano MC(1), Clemente 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition and Sustainable Animal Production, Estación 
Experimental del Zaidín, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, San 
Miguel 101, Armilla, E-18100 Granada, Spain.

The global market for plant-based drinks is experiencing rapid growth driven by 
consumer demand for more sustainable diets, including vegetarian and vegan 
options. Soy beverages in particular are gaining popularity among individuals 
with lactose intolerance and milk protein allergies. They are considered an 
excellent source of high-quality protein, vitamin B, unsaturated fatty acids, 
and beneficial phytochemicals such as phytosterols, soy lecithins, and 
isoflavones. This review presents a comprehensive market survey of fifty-two soy 
beverages available in Spain and other European countries. The predominant 
category among those evaluated was calcium and vitamin-fortified drinks, 
accounting for 60% of the market. This reflects the need to address the 
nutritional gap compared to cow's milk and meet essential dietary requirements. 
The review covers the technological aspects of industrial soy milk production, 
including both traditional methods and innovative processing techniques. 
Additionally, it analyzes multiple studies and meta-analyses, presenting 
compelling evidence for the positive effects of soy beverages on various aspects 
of health. The review specifically examines the contributions of different 
components found in soy beverages, such as isoflavones, proteins, fiber, and 
oligosaccharides. Moreover, it explores controversial aspects of soy 
consumption, including its potential implications for growth, puberty, 
fertility, feminization, and the thyroid gland.

DOI: 10.3390/foods12142665
PMCID: PMC10379384
PMID: 37509757

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this review.


7. Nutrients. 2023 May 10;15(10):2258. doi: 10.3390/nu15102258.

Soy, Rice and Oat Drinks: Investigating Chemical and Biological Safety in 
Plant-Based Milk Alternatives.

Giugliano R(1), Musolino N(2), Ciccotelli V(1), Ferraris C(2), Savio V(1), 
Vivaldi B(1), Ercolini C(1), Bianchi DM(2), Decastelli L(2).

Author information:
(1)National Reference Laboratory of Pesticides in Cereals and Feed (NRL), 
Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale del Piemonte, Liguria E Valle D'Aosta, 
Piazza Borgo Pila 39/24, 16129 Genoa, Italy.
(2)National Reference Centre for the Detection of Substances and Products 
Causing Allergies or Intolerances in Food (CReNaRiA), Istituto Zooprofilattico 
Sperimentale del Piemonte, Liguria e Valle D'Aosta, Via Bologna 148, 10154 
Turin, Italy.

During the last decades, plant-based milk has become very appreciated by 
consumers, becoming a staple ingredient, especially for alternative breakfasts. 
Milk contains lactose, which is a sugar hydrolysed by the lactase enzyme. 
Lactose intolerance and lactose malabsorption are very common food intolerances 
among individuals. However, a lot of consumers consider themselves as lactose 
intolerant on the basis of self-reported intolerance and start to avoid dairy 
products, ignoring that plant-based milk alternatives are not nutritionally 
comparable to animal milk, especially in terms of protein intake. The aim of 
this study is to grow folder knowledge of the security of plant-based drinks, 
helping competent authorities to issue a risk assessment and to apply national 
plans about consumer safety. Results show that proper sanitary practices, such 
as pasteurization, are necessary in plant-based milk alternatives as well as in 
dairy milk. Chemical analysis has highlighted that there are no pesticide risks 
for consumers.

DOI: 10.3390/nu15102258
PMCID: PMC10221834
PMID: 37242141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.


8. Nutrients. 2021 Jul 30;13(8):2650. doi: 10.3390/nu13082650.

An Overview on Nutritional Aspects of Plant-Based Beverages Used as Substitutes 
for Cow's Milk.

Fructuoso I(1), Romão B(1), Han H(2), Raposo A(3), Ariza-Montes A(4), 
Araya-Castillo L(5), Zandonadi RP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of Brasília, Brasília 70910-900, Brazil.
(2)College of Hospitality and Tourism Management, Sejong University, 98 
Gunja-dong, Gwanjin-gu, Seoul 143-747, Korea.
(3)CBIOS (Research Center for Biosciences and Health Technologies), Universidade 
Lusófona de Humanidades e Tecnologias, Campo Grande 376, 1749-024 Lisboa, 
Portugal.
(4)Social Matters Research Group, Universidad Loyola Andalucía, C/Escritor 
Castilla Aguayo, 4 14004 Córdoba, Spain.
(5)Facultad de Economía y Negocios, Universidad Andrés Bello, Santiago de Chile 
7591538, Chile.

The presence of milk in meals and products consumed daily is common and at the 
same time the adoption of a milk-free diet increases due to milk allergy, 
lactose intolerance, vegan diets, and others. Therefore, there is an increasing 
demand for plant-based beverages, which present variable and, sometimes, unknown 
nutritional characteristics. This study sought to compare the nutritional 
aspects of plant-based beverages used as substitutes for cow's milk described in 
scientific studies. Therefore, we used a review of the scientific literature on 
PubMed, Google Scholar, Scopus, Web of Science, Google Patents, Embase, and 
ScienceDirect databases. The inclusion criteria were scientific studies 
referring to plant-based beverage used as an alternative to cow's milk; 
published in the English language; present data on the serving size, 
ingredients, and nutritional composition, containing at least data on energy and 
macronutrients of plant-based beverages. Ingredients and data on energy, 
macronutrients, and, if available, dietary fiber and some micronutrients of 
plant-based beverages were collected. Data were obtained from 122 beverages of 
22 different matrices, with soy being the most used (27.87%, n = 34). The 
variation in the amount of nutrients found was 6-183 Kcal/100 mL for energy 
value; 0.00-22.29 g/100 mL for carbohydrate; 0.06-12.43 g/100 mL for protein; 
0.00-19.00 g/100 mL for lipid; 0.00-4.40 g/100 mL for dietary fiber; 
0.00-1252.94 mg/100 mL for calcium; 0.04-1.40 mg/100 mL for iron; 0.84-10,178.60 
mg/100 mL for magnesium; 0.00-343.43 mg/100 mL for sodium. Salt was the most 
commonly found added ingredient in plant-based beverages. Some beverages have 
reached certain amounts of cow's milk nutrients. However, studies have pointed 
out differences in their qualities/types. Thus, attention is needed when 
replacing milk with these alternatives.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13082650
PMCID: PMC8399839
PMID: 34444815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


9. Curr Res Food Sci. 2021 Apr 24;4:295-300. doi: 10.1016/j.crfs.2021.04.001. 
eCollection 2021.

Typical gut indigenous bacteria in ICR mice fed a soy protein-based normal or 
low-protein diet.

Nakamura S(1), Kuda T(1), Midorikawa Y(1), Takahashi H(1), Kimura B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Science and Technology, Tokyo University of Marine Science 
and Technology, 4-5-7 Among Konan, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 108-8477, Japan.

For patients with inflammatory bowel disease, cow's milk allergy, and lactose 
intolerance, soymilk is a potential alternative to cow's milk. In this study, we 
aimed to identify the effects of a soy protein-based low-protein diet on the 
body and organ weights and the gut microbiome of six-week-old mice fed a diet 
containing 20% (SP) or 5% (LP) soy protein for 14 days via 16S rRNA (V4) 
amplicon sequencing. Body weight gain (growth) and liver, spleen, and fat tissue 
weight were significantly suppressed by the LP diet. Operational taxonomic unit 
numbers and α-diversity were lower in the LP group than in the SP group. A 
principal coordinate analysis revealed differences in the gut microbiome 
compositions of SP and LP mice. The abundances of caecal Roseburia sp., 
Alistipes sp., and bacteria from the family Muribaculaceae were lower in the LP 
group than in the SP group. In contrast, the abundance of Desulfovibrionaceae, 
which is positively correlated with inflammation, was higher in the LP group 
than in the SP group. These results differed from the effects of a milk 
casein-based low-protein diet (reported previously). Based on these findings, we 
conclude that the undesirable effects of a low-protein diet and/or protein 
deficiency are related to changes in the gut microbiome composition and may 
differ depending on the kind of proteins used.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.crfs.2021.04.001
PMCID: PMC8102713
PMID: 33997796

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


10. J Am Nutr Assoc. 2022 May-Jun;41(4):424-434. doi:
10.1080/07315724.2021.1891587.  Epub 2021 Apr 8.

Lactose Intolerance and Its Dietary Management: An Update.

Katoch GK(1), Nain N(1), Kaur S(1), Rasane P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Technology and Nutrition, Lovely Professional University, 
Phagwara, India.

Milk is the most common food consumed worldwide and is also a major ingredient 
in the preparation of various dairy products. However, despite the high 
production and consumption of milk and milk-based products, there is a large 
percent of the world's population that suffer from allergies to milk solids and 
lactose intolerance. Lactose intolerance specifically means the inability of the 
body to breakdown the sugar to its simplest form for assimilation and it is due 
to the inefficiency or lack of the enzyme in the human body. The most convenient 
prevention method for the affected population is to avoid milk and milk-based 
products but this may be a cause of development of other health related issues 
that result from inadequate nutrient consumption. To help find an alternative to 
this problem, this study aims at first studying the underlying information on 
lactose intolerance and then studying plant-based beverages as a possible 
alternative to milk and milk-based products.Key teaching pointsLactose 
intolerance specifically means the inability of the body to breakdown the sugar 
to its simplest form for assimilation and it is due to the inefficiency or lack 
of the enzyme in the human body.Consumption of probiotics may help relieve the 
symptoms of lactose intolerance.Soy beverage can be an economical alternative 
for lactose intolerant populations and has calcium content comparable to bovine 
milk.Calcium absorption in fortified plant based beverages depends upon type of 
calcium salt used.

DOI: 10.1080/07315724.2021.1891587
PMID: 33831336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]