1. Nutrients. 2025 Feb 11;17(4):646. doi: 10.3390/nu17040646.

The Role of Dairy in Human Nutrition: Myths and Realities.

Sanjulián L(1), Fernández-Rico S(1), González-Rodríguez N(1), Cepeda A(1), 
Miranda JM(1), Fente C(1), Lamas A(1), Regal P(1).

Author information:
(1)Food Hygiene, Inspection and Control Laboratory (Lhica), Department of 
Analytical Chemistry, Nutrition and Bromatology, School of Veterinary Science, 
Campus Terra, University of Santiago de Compostela, 27002 Lugo, Spain.

Milk is a highly complex food that contains all the nutrients necessary for the 
development of mammalian offspring. For millennia, humans have included milk and 
milk products as major components of their diet. However, the effect of the 
consumption of dairy products on health has been a concern in recent years in 
terms of myths and realities. This review briefly describes the composition of 
bovine milk, the positive and negative effects that have been related to dairy 
products, and those aspects where the scientific evidence is still inconclusive. 
In addition to being nutritional, dairy products are a source of bioactive 
peptides, prebiotics and probiotics, fatty acids such as CLA, and fat globule 
membranes or have a protective effect against certain diseases. Negative effects 
include milk protein allergy or lactose intolerance. The effects of dairy 
products on certain cancers, such as prostate cancer, and their role in type II 
diabetes mellitus or weight gain are still inconclusive. Although the role of 
dairy products in cardiovascular risk is still inconclusive, recent 
meta-analyses have shown that dairy products may have a protective effect.

DOI: 10.3390/nu17040646
PMCID: PMC11858442
PMID: 40004974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


2. Prep Biochem Biotechnol. 2025 Feb 19:1-20. doi: 10.1080/10826068.2025.2467441.
 Online ahead of print.

From probiotic fermentation to functional drinks: a review on fruit juices with 
lactic acid bacteria and prebiotics.

Sa'aid N(1), Tan JS(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Industrial Technology, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Gelugor, Pulau 
Pinang, Malaysia.

In recent years, the demand for probiotic beverages has surged, with dairy 
products traditionally serving as the primary sources of probiotics. However, 
many consumers face health issues such as lactose intolerance, milk allergies, 
and high cholesterol, which prevent them from consuming dairy products. This has 
led to the exploration of nondairy alternatives, particularly fruit juices, as 
carriers for probiotics. Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) have been identified as 
beneficial probiotics that can be incorporated into these beverages. The 
inclusion of prebiotics, such as inulin and galacto-oligosaccharides (GOS), in 
fruit juices has shown promise in enhancing the growth and activity of LAB, 
thereby creating functional beverages that support digestive health. Despite 
numerous studies on fruit juice fermentation, there is limited data on the 
optimal pairing of probiotics and prebiotics to develop stable, nondairy 
functional drinks. This review underscores the potential of lactic acid 
fermentation and the integration of prebiotics and probiotics in fruit juices, 
highlighting the necessity for further research to optimize these combinations 
for enhanced health benefits and improved beverage stability.

DOI: 10.1080/10826068.2025.2467441
PMID: 39968919


3. Dis Mon. 2024 Dec;70(12):101823. doi: 10.1016/j.disamonth.2024.101823. Epub
2024  Dec 2.

Lactose intolerance - A practical approach, Part 1.

McFee RB(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Director, Ellis Medical Toxicology, USA. Electronic address: 
mikemallary01@gmail.com.

The toxicology, immunology and gastroenterology aspects of food remain important 
in clinical practice, as anyone treating food related anaphylaxis, or chronic 
intolerance syndromes can attest. Although entire editions of journals could 
focus on any one aspect of adverse effects from food, the following review 
addresses the important and prevalent gastrointestinal condition lactose 
intolerance and gastrointestinal (GI) conditions that have similar presentation 
but require different treatment.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.disamonth.2024.101823
PMID: 39627100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The author 
reports no financial conflict of interest.


4. Food Sci Nutr. 2024 Oct 9;12(11):9391-9402. doi: 10.1002/fsn3.4494.
eCollection  2024 Nov.

Influence of Brown Rice, Pea, and Soy Proteins on the Physicochemical Properties 
and Sensory Acceptance of Dairy-Free Frozen Dessert.

Hasan T(1)(2), Thoo YY(1), Siow LF(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Science Monash University Malaysia Bandar Sunway Selangor Malaysia.
(2)Department of Food Technology and Nutrition Science Noakhali Science and 
Technology University Noakhali Bangladesh.

Fat and protein derived from milk are prime ingredients in a frozen dessert such 
as ice cream conferring multiple desirable functionalities. However, this frozen 
dairy dessert is not suitable for individuals having lactose intolerance, cow 
milk allergy, or vegans. Hence, the study aimed to formulate dairy-free frozen 
desserts using plant oils and plant proteins and compare their physicochemical 
characteristics and sensory acceptance against an ice cream containing milk fat 
and milk protein. Results indicated that the types of protein significantly 
influenced the physicochemical properties and sensory acceptance of the frozen 
dessert samples. Frozen desserts containing brown rice, pea, and soy protein 
showed greater resistance to melting (0.29, 0.12, and 0.19%/min vs. 1.95%/min), 
but they scored lower in sensory quality than ice cream made with milk protein; 
although they remained at an acceptable level. When compared among the plant 
proteins, the physicochemical characteristics of frozen desserts containing 
brown rice, pea, and soy protein varied because of the differences in the 
respective protein composition. Frozen dessert with brown rice protein showed 
higher overrun (47.50% vs. 40.78% and 37.8%), lower hardness (20.02 N vs. 22.24 
and 26.37 N), and higher melting rate (0.29%/min vs. 0.19 and 0.12%/min) than 
frozen desserts containing soy and pea protein. Additionally, the brown rice 
protein frozen dessert received lower sensory acceptance than soy and pea 
protein frozen desserts. In summary, brown rice, pea, and soy proteins showed 
potential to be used as viable alternatives to milk protein for dairy-free 
frozen dessert applications.

© 2024 The Author(s). Food Science & Nutrition published by Wiley Periodicals 
LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/fsn3.4494
PMCID: PMC11606870
PMID: 39620032

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


5. Nutrients. 2024 Oct 29;16(21):3673. doi: 10.3390/nu16213673.

Probiotic Milk and Oat Beverages with Increased Protein Content: Survival of 
Probiotic Bacteria Under Simulated In Vitro Digestion Conditions.

Pawlos M(1), Szajnar K(1), Znamirowska-Piotrowska A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dairy Technology, Institute of Food Technology and Nutrition, 
College of Natural Sciences, University of Rzeszow, Cwiklinskiej 2D, 35-601 
Rzeszow, Poland.

BACKGROUND: The increasing prevalence of plant-based dietary preferences, driven 
by lactose intolerance, allergies, and adherence to vegan diets, has 
necessitated the exploration of alternative food matrices for probiotic 
delivery.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to evaluate the effects of whey protein isolate, 
pea protein isolate, and soy protein isolate on the viability of L. casei and L. 
johnsonii during simulated in vitro gastrointestinal digestion. Furthermore, the 
study investigated the impact of two distinct matrices-cow's milk and an 
oat-based beverage-on the survival of these probiotic strains. Fermented 
products were prepared using cow's milk and an oat-based beverage as matrices, 
with simulated digestion performed following a seven-day storage period at 5 °C. 
The in vitro digestion model encompassed oral, gastric, and small intestinal 
phases, with probiotic viability assessed using the plate-deep method at each 
stage.
METHODS: Before digestion, L. casei exhibited higher populations than L. 
johnsonii in both matrices. Including 3% soy and pea protein, isolates promoted 
the growth of L. casei in both fermented milk and oat beverages. However, a 
marked reduction in probiotic viability was observed during the gastric phase, 
with L. casei counts decreasing by 6.4-7.8 log cfu g-1 in fermented milk and 
3.1-4 log cfu g-1 in oat beverages, while L. johnsonii demonstrated similar 
reductions.
CONCLUSION: These findings underscore the protective role of dairy components on 
probiotic viability, while the oat-based matrix exhibited a reduced capacity for 
sustaining probiotic populations throughout digestion. Future research should 
focus on optimizing plant-based matrices to enhance probiotic stability during 
gastrointestinal transit.

DOI: 10.3390/nu16213673
PMCID: PMC11547824
PMID: 39519506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


6. J Sci Food Agric. 2025 Jan 15;105(1):74-83. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.13805. Epub 2024
 Aug 13.

Alginate coatings applied on apple cubes as a vehicle for Lacticaseibacillus 
casei: probiotic viability and overall quality of a new functional product.

Bambace MF(#)(1)(2), Alvarez MV(#)(1)(2), Moreira MDR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Grupo de Investigación en Ingeniería en Alimentos. Instituto de Ciencia y 
Tecnología de Alimentos y Ambiente (INCITAA), Facultad de Ingeniería, 
Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata, Mar del Plata, Argentina.
(2)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Worldwide, vegan and vegetarian lifestyles, as well as food 
allergies and intolerance (e.g. lactose intolerance and milk protein allergy) 
demand the development of alternatives to dairy-based probiotic foods. In the 
present study, probiotic Lacticaseibacillus casei CECT 9104 was added to 
alginate-based edible coatings enriched with inulin and oligofructose and 
applied to fresh-cut apple. Microbiological, physicochemical and sensory quality 
parameters of the apple cubes were monitored during 8 days of refrigerated 
storage. Lacticaseibacillus casei was tested for its antagonistic effect against 
inoculated Listeria innocua and Escherichia coli O157:H7. The viability of the 
probiotic strain during refrigerated storage and after simulated 
gastrointestinal digestion (GID) was evaluated.
RESULTS: After 8 days of storage, 9.52-9.64 log colony-forming units (CFU) g-1 
of L. casei were detected in apple samples. The functional apple cubes retained 
8.31-8.43 log CFU g-1 of the probiotic after GID, without a significant effect 
of prebiotic addition. The microbiological quality and nutritional properties 
were maintained by the use of active coatings, whereas the sensory quality 
decreased after 8 days of storage. A bactericidal effect was exerted by the 
probiotic strain loaded in the coating against L. innocua artificially 
inoculated on apple cubes. Escherichia coli O157:H7 counts were reduced by 
2.5 log after 8 days.
CONCLUSION: This study has demonstrated the suitability of apple cubes as an 
alternative matrix to milk for carrying probiotic L. casei CECT 9104 and 
prebiotics, offering a promising alternative for the development of plant-based 
functional foods. © 2024 Society of Chemical Industry.

© 2024 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.13805
PMID: 39139005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Behav Sci (Basel). 2024 Jul 5;14(7):569. doi: 10.3390/bs14070569.

Milking the Alternatives: Understanding Coffee Consumers' Preferences for 
Non-Dairy Milk.

Halabi N(1), Hristova V(2)(3), Vlaev I(1).

Author information:
(1)Warwick Business School, University of Warwick, Scarman Rd., Coventry CV4 7 
AL, UK.
(2)Psychology Department, Sofia University "St. Kliment Ohridski", bul. "Tsar 
Osvoboditel" 15, 1504 Sofia, Bulgaria.
(3)Institute for Population and Human Studies, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, 
Acad. G. Bonchev Str. 6, 1113 Sofia, Bulgaria.

Consumer interest in plant-based milk alternatives is growing, despite extra 
charges in coffeehouses. While much research exists on non-dairy alternatives, 
plant-based milks in coffee drinks remain understudied. This study examines 
consumer preferences and behaviors regarding milk alternatives in coffee, using 
the Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF) and the Behavior Change Wheel (BCW). A 
survey of 200 participants from 19 countries explored demographics, coffee 
habits, attitudes towards non-dairy milk charges, and marketing awareness. 
Market insights showed taste as the main reason for coffee choice, with a 
preference for cow's milk and local cafes for quality. Many opposed the extra 
charges for non-dairy options, citing lactose intolerance or allergies, 
especially among Gen Z and Millennials. Regional variations included stronger 
opposition in the UK and Germany compared to the UAE and USA. The marketing for 
non-dairy milk was less memorable than general coffee advertisements. Regression 
analysis confirmed that viewing non-dairy milk as a dietary staple increased 
consumption, aligning with the TDF's "Beliefs about Consequences" domain. 
Finally, within the BCW framework, the intervention strategies centered on 
training and coercion were discussed. Implementing these approaches could 
encourage the wider adoption of non-dairy milk options in coffee shops, 
fostering inclusivity, health awareness, and supporting environmental 
sustainability efforts.

DOI: 10.3390/bs14070569
PMCID: PMC11273792
PMID: 39062392

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


8. Compr Rev Food Sci Food Saf. 2024 Jul;23(4):e13402. doi: 
10.1111/1541-4337.13402.

The role of fermentation with lactic acid bacteria in quality and health effects 
of plant-based dairy analogues.

Erem E(1), Kilic-Akyilmaz M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Engineering, Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, 
Türkiye.

The modern food industry is undergoing a rapid change with the trend of 
production of plant-based food products that are more sustainable and have less 
impact on nature. Plant-based dairy analogues have been increasingly popular due 
to their suitability for individuals with milk protein allergy or lactose 
intolerance and those preferring a plant-based diet. Nevertheless, plant-based 
products still have insufficient nutritional quality, undesirable structure, and 
earthy, green, and bean-like flavor compared to dairy products. In addition, 
most plant-based foods contain lesser amounts of essential nutrients, 
antinutrients limiting the bioavailability of some nutrients, and allergenic 
proteins. Novel processing technologies can be applied to have a homogeneous and 
stable structure. On the other hand, fermentation of plant-based matrix with 
lactic acid bacteria can provide a solution to most of these problems. 
Additional nutrients can be produced and antinutrients can be degraded by 
bacterial metabolism, thereby increasing nutritional value. Allergenic proteins 
can be hydrolyzed reducing their immunoreactivity. In addition, fermentation has 
been found to reduce undesired flavors and to enhance various bioactivities of 
plant foods. However, the main challenge in the production of fermented 
plant-based dairy analogues is to mimic familiar dairy-like flavors by producing 
the major flavor compounds other than organic acids, yielding a flavor profile 
similar to those of fermented dairy products. Further studies are required for 
the improvement of the flavor of fermented plant-based dairy analogues through 
the selection of special microbial cultures and formulations.

© 2024 The Author(s). Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety 
published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Institute of Food Technologists.

DOI: 10.1111/1541-4337.13402
PMID: 39030804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Food Allergy. 2020 Sep 1;2(1):3-6. doi: 10.2500/jfa.2020.2.200022.
eCollection  2020 Sep.

Classification of adverse food reactions.

Cox AL(1), Sicherer SH(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pediatrics, Jaffe Food Allergy Institute, Icahn School 
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.

Foods can induce adverse reactions by a variety of mechanisms. An understanding 
of the characteristic signs and symptoms and the related mechanisms of adverse 
food reactions allows the clinician to efficiently diagnose and treat patients. 
Adverse reactions to foods can be classified based on whether there is a 
nonimmunologic or immunologic basis for symptoms. Food intolerance, or a 
nonimmunologic reaction, includes a range of responses to foods that result 
primarily from an individual's intrinsic inability to metabolize a component of 
the food, e.g., lactose sugar in dairy products. Other nonimmunologic adverse 
reactions may be attributed to food toxins or pharmacologic properties 
pharmacologic properties of foods themselves. Immunologic adverse reactions, in 
contrast, involve immune responses to food and are termed food allergy. Food 
allergy may further be categorized based on the underlying immunopathophysiology 
as immunoglobulin E (IgE) mediated, non-IgE mediated, or cell mediated. Some 
chronic allergic responses involve a combination of immune mechanisms. This 
review provides a general classification system for adverse food reactions and 
describes specificconditions.

Copyright © 2020, The Author(s). Published by OceanSide Publications, Inc., 
U.S.A.

DOI: 10.2500/jfa.2020.2.200022
PMCID: PMC11250527
PMID: 39022138

Conflict of interest statement: S.H. Sicherer reports royalty payments from 
UpToDate and from Johns Hopkins University Press; grants to his institution from 
the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, from Food Allergy 
Research and Education, and from HAL Allergy; and personal fees from the 
American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology as Deputy Editor of the 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology: In Practice, outside of the 
submitted work. A.L. Cox has no conflicts of interest to declare pertaining to 
this article


10. Nutrients. 2024 Jun 25;16(13):2007. doi: 10.3390/nu16132007.

A Review: The Effect of Bovine Colostrum on Immunity in People of All Ages.

Duan H(1)(2), Sun Q(3)(4), Chen C(3), Wang R(4)(5), Yan W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Biochemical Engineering, Beijing Union University, Beijing 100023, 
China.
(2)Beijing Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substances and Functional Food, Beijing 
Union University, Beijing 100023, China.
(3)Native Nutrition and Medical Research Institute, Tianmeijian Biotechnology 
(Beijing) Co., Ltd., Beijing 100101, China.
(4)Research and Development Center, Jiangsu Tianmeijian Nature Bioengineering 
Co., Ltd., Nanjing 210038, China.
(5)Research and Development Center, Nanjing Daily Nutrition Biotechnology Co., 
Ltd., Nanjing 211215, China.

Bovine colostrum provides newborn calves with strong passive immunity, which 
will further affect the immunity of their offspring. Compared with other 
commercial dairy products, bovine colostrum emphasizes the limit of aflatoxin 
M1, pathogenic bacteria, microorganisms, antibiotics, stimulants, and other 
items, so it is safe to use. There are many reports that the use of bovine 
colostrum as a breast milk fortifier for preterm infants provides necessary 
immune support for premature infants, but the selection of bovine colostrum 
products chosen must be free of Bacillus cereus because they are very dangerous 
for premature infants. This also emphasizes that for the bovine colostrum that 
is used in preterm infants, more clinical research support is needed. At the 
same time, it should also be emphasized that the composition of BC is different 
from that of human colostrum, in particular, the main protein of BC is casein, 
while the main protein in breast milk is whey protein, especially α-lactalbumin, 
which together with ovalbumin is still the reference protein with the best 
biological value, especially for muscles. Therefore, bovine colostrum is 
currently not a complete substitute for breast milk. In recent years, in 
addition to reports of bovine colostrum use in preterm infants, studies have 
also found that bovine colostrum has immunomodulatory and promoting effects in 
adolescents, adults, and the elderly. This suggests that bovine colostrum has 
the potential to provide appropriate immune support for people of all ages. 
Therefore, this study aimed to evaluate the quality of nutritional 
characteristics of bovine colostrum on three dimensions. The effects of bovine 
colostrum on people of all ages is a narrative review of the effects of bovine 
colostrum on immunity in people of all ages. This review identified several 
classes of immunoactive substances in bovine colostrum, including 
immunoglobulins, cytokines, and enzymes, and compared the nutritional 
composition of bovine colostrum with mature milk, colostrum and mature milk in 
full-term breast milk, and colostrum and mature milk in preterm breast milk, to 
demonstrate that bovine colostrum provides a rich range of immunoactive 
components. In addition, the influencing factors affecting the quality of bovine 
colostrum (immunoglobulin) were reviewed, and it was found that individual 
differences, environmental factors, and processing methods had a great impact on 
the quality of BC. More importantly, the immunomodulatory effects of bovine 
colostrum in people of all ages were reviewed in detail (with an emphasis on 
preterm infants and immunocompromised children in neonates) as evidence to 
support the immunity effects of colostrum in people of all ages. This review 
hopes to use the above evidence to make people understand the health role of 
bovine colostrum as having a human immunomodulatory effect, and at the same 
time, when seeing the potential value of bovine colostrum in the future, the 
limitations of its application should also be deeply re-explored, such as 
lactose intolerance, allergies, etc., to provide effective solutions for the 
wide application of bovine colostrum.

DOI: 10.3390/nu16132007
PMCID: PMC11242949
PMID: 38999755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors Qian Sun and Chao Chen were employed by 
the company Native Nutrition and Medical Research Institute of Tianmeijian 
Biotechnology (Beijing) Co., Ltd. Authors Qian Sun and Rongchang Wang were 
employed by the company Research and Development Center of Jiangsu Tianmeijian 
Nature Bioengineering Co., Ltd. Author Rongchang Wang was employed by the 
company Research and Development Center of Jiangsu Tianmeijian Nature 
Bioengineering Co., Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.