1. Food Res Int. 2020 Dec;138(Pt B):109780. doi: 10.1016/j.foodres.2020.109780. 
Epub 2020 Oct 15.

Food and food products associated with food allergy and food intolerance - An 
overview.

Muthukumar J(1), Selvasekaran P(1), Lokanadham M(1), Chidambaram R(2).

Author information:
(1)Instrumental and Food Analysis Laboratory, School of Biosciences and 
Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu 632014, India.
(2)Instrumental and Food Analysis Laboratory, School of Biosciences and 
Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu 632014, India. 
Electronic address: cramalingam@vit.ac.in.

Immune-mediated food allergy and non-immune mediated food intolerance are 
categorized as the most common adverse reactions resulting from the ingestion of 
certain foods. As there is no standard treatment, the possible remedy to avoid 
exposure to these adverse reactions is adhering to a strict diet that eliminates 
allergic and intolerant foods. The commonly consumed foods including dairy 
products, egg, fish, shellfish, tree nuts, peanut, soybean, and wheat-based 
products are proven to cause food allergy. Foods containing lactose, gluten, 
high FODMAPs, biogenic amines, and certain food additives leads to potential 
health risks in intolerant individuals. Besides, there are various foods whose 
mechanism of action in triggering food allergy and intolerance is yet to be 
defined. However, the public in-depth understanding of natural foods, processed 
foods, and packaged food products that induce allergic reactions and intolerance 
remains low. Therefore, awareness of diet that partially or completely excludes 
the intake of certain foods associated with these reactions should be widespread 
among the consumers.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodres.2020.109780
PMID: 33288166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. FP Essent. 2018 Sep;472:16-19.

Allergy and Asthma: Food Allergies.

Mehta R(1).

Author information:
(1)Florida Hospital Family Medicine Residency, 133 Benmore Drive, Winter Park, 
FL 32792.

Food allergies are immune-mediated allergic adverse reactions that occur after 
exposure to specific foods. The most commonly recognized food allergies are 
immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated reactions (eg, urticaria, angioedema, 
anaphylaxis) that result from exposure to milk, egg, peanut, tree nuts, 
shellfish, fish, wheat, or soy. However, other foods can cause food allergies. 
Oral allergy syndrome is a common but underrecognized condition characterized by 
transient oropharyngeal symptoms that result from ingestion of uncooked fruits 
or vegetables. Non-IgE-mediated food allergies manifest with more delayed 
symptoms than IgE-mediated food allergies, and predominately cause 
gastrointestinal symptoms. Food allergies often are overreported because they 
may be confused with food intolerances or nonimmunologic adverse food reactions 
(eg, lactose intolerance, food poisoning, caffeine intolerance). Food allergies 
are diagnosed using IgE skin tests, IgE serum tests, or oral food challenge 
tests. These allergies are best managed by avoidance of the food or foods 
related to the allergy because they require ingestion rather than contact to 
precipitate symptoms. Injectable epinephrine should be prescribed for patients 
at risk of anaphylaxis. Careful food label reading and food preparation, 
awareness, and education are keys to prevention.

Written permission from the American Academy of Family Physicians is required 
for reproduction of this material in whole or in part in any form or medium.

PMID: 30152669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. BMJ. 2017 Aug 21;358:j3468. doi: 10.1136/bmj.j3468.

Medicines, excipients, and dietary intolerances.

Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.j3468
PMID: 28827390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Competing interests are in 
line with DTB’s policy on conflicts of interests.


4. Pediatr Ann. 2013 Jun 1;42(6):96-101. doi: 10.3928/00904481-20130522-09.

Clinical manifestations of food allergy.

Perry TT(1), Pesek RD.

Author information:
(1)Allergy and Immunology Division, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, 
College of Medicine, Children’s Way, Slot 512-13, Little Rock AR 72202, USA. 
perrytamarat@uams.edu

Adverse reactions to foods are a diverse group of clinical syndromes resulting 
from immunologic and non-immunologic responses to food ingestion. Symptoms can 
range from mild, self-limiting reactions to severe, life-threatening reactions 
depending on the mechanism. This review primarily focuses on the clinical 
manifestations of immunologically derived adverse food reactions or food 
allergies.The true prevalence of food allergy is unknown. Up to 25% of the 
general population believes that they may be allergic to some food; however, the 
actual prevalence of food allergy diagnosed by a provider appears to be 1.5% to 
2% of the adult population and approximately 6% to 8% of children. This 
discrepancy makes it imperative that clinicians are aware of the different food 
allergy syndromes. With a clear understanding of the clinical manifestations of 
food allergies, an accurate diagnosis and treatment plan can be formulated. 
Failing to do so may result in unnecessary dietary restrictions that may 
adversely affect nutritional status, growth, and quality of life.Most food 
allergic reactions are secondary to a limited number of foods, and the most 
common foods causing allergic reactions in children include milk, egg, peanuts, 
tree nuts, and fish. In adolescents and adults, allergies to peanuts, tree nuts, 
fish, and shellfish are most prevalent. Food allergies can result from 
immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated, non-IGE-mediated, or mixed IgE/non-IgE 
mechanisms. The purpose of this review is to discuss the clinical manifestations 
of each of these types of food allergy.

Copyright 2013, SLACK Incorporated.

DOI: 10.3928/00904481-20130522-09
PMID: 23718237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]