1. Nutrients. 2024 Dec 8;16(23):4236. doi: 10.3390/nu16234236.

Gluten-Free Diet for Fashion or Necessity? Review with New Speculations on 
Irritable Bowel Syndrome-like Disorders.

Borghini R(1), Spagnuolo A(2), Donato G(3), Borghini G(4).

Author information:
(1)Stella Maris S.T.P.-Gastroenterology Unit, Via Giuseppe Prina, 8, 00139 Rome, 
Italy.
(2)Medical Oncology, Department of Radiology, Oncology and Pathology, Sapienza 
University of Rome, 00155 Rome, Italy.
(3)Gastroenterology Unit, Department of Translational and Precision Medicine, 
Sapienza University of Rome, 00155 Rome, Italy.
(4)Stella Maris S.T.P.-Food and Human Nutrition Unit, 00139 Rome, Italy.

Nowadays, the gluten-free diet (GFD) has become much more than the dietary 
treatment for celiac disease. Due to its presumed beneficial effects even in 
non-celiac subjects, it has become a new fashion statement and it is promoted by 
some healthcare professionals, social media and marketing strategists. On the 
other hand, regardless of a proper medical indication, a GFD may present side 
effects, such as poor palatability, high costs and socio-psychological 
adversities. Moreover, it can be an obstacle to correct clinical practice and 
may induce nutritional deficiency due to a low-quality diet. In addition, a GFD 
can trigger or exacerbate many irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)-like disorders in 
predisposed subjects: reactivity to dietary nickel, the increased consumption of 
FODMAP-rich foods and histamine intolerance seem to frequently play a relevant 
role. The possible intersections between high-risk foods in these categories of 
patients, as well as the possible overlaps among IBS-like disorders during GFD, 
are described. In conclusion, it is advisable to undergo a careful clinical 
evaluation by a gastroenterologist and a nutritionist (in some cases, also a 
psychotherapist) before starting and during a GFD, because both benefits and 
risks are possible. It is also important to take into account IBS-like disorders 
that can be exacerbated by a GFD and that are still underestimated today.

DOI: 10.3390/nu16234236
PMCID: PMC11644447
PMID: 39683629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


2. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2024 Jun 1;102(6):391-395. doi:
10.1139/cjpp-2023-0464.  Epub 2024 Apr 8.

Discontinuing semaglutide after weight loss: strategy for weight maintenance and 
a possible new side effect.

Carris NW(1), Wallace S(2), DuCoin CG(3), Mhaskar R(4), Stern M(5), Bunnell 
B(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapeutics and Clinical Research, USF Health Taneja 
College of Pharmacy, University of South Florida; 12901 Bruce B. Downs Blvd MDC 
30, Tampa FL, 33612, USA.
(2)Tampa General Medical Group, 2211 Lithia Center Ln, Valrico, FL 33594, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, USF Health Morsani College of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, 5 Tampa General Circle, Suite 410, Tampa, FL 33606, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, USF Health Morsani College of Medicine, 
University of South Florida, 560 Channelside Drive MDD 54, Tampa, FL 33602, USA.
(5)Department of Child and Family Studies, College of Behavioral and Community 
Sciences, University of South Florida 13301 Bruce B. Downs Blvd., MHC 2510, 
Tampa, FL 33612, USA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurosciences, USF Health Morsani 
College of Medicine, University of South Florida 3515 E. Fletcher Ave, Tampa, FL 
33613, USA.

Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs) facilitate weight loss. 
Weight regain off therapy is concerning. We reported the case of a 35-year-old 
male prescribed oral semaglutide with 22.7 kg weight loss over 120 days. Herein, 
we describe the clinical course when discontinuing GLP-1 RA therapy, one 
approach to maintaining weight loss after discontinuation, and a possible new 
side effect. At day 120, we continued oral semaglutide 7 mg daily, down from 
14 mg, for weight maintenance with subsequent weight regain. We re-increased 
semaglutide to 14 mg/day with weight re-loss within 1 month and weight maintance 
for a year. We then discontinued semaglutide; weight loss was maintained for 6 
months. The patient reported lactose intolerance ∼13 months before starting 
semaglutide. During semaglutide therapy, the patient reported worsened lactose 
intolerance and new gluten intolerance. Food allergy/celiac testing were 
negative. Intolerances did not improve with semaglutide discontinuation. Six 
months after semaglutide discontinuation, the patient was diagnosed with small 
intestinal bacterial overgrowth, possibly worsened by semaglutide. Factors 
potentially supporting weight maintenance were early drug treatment for 
new-onset obesity, non-geriatric age, strength training, and diet modification. 
The case highlights tailoring approaches to maintain weight loss without GLP-1 
RAs. Trials are needed to optimize weight maintenance strategies.

DOI: 10.1139/cjpp-2023-0464
PMID: 38587178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Carris has received research funding 
(institution receives and manages funds) from Sanofi Winthrop Industries. Dr. 
DuCoin declares consulting for Johnson & Johnson, Medtronic, and Intuitive. The 
remaining authors have no conflicts of interest, or other interests, that might 
be perceived to influence the results and/or discussion reported in this paper.


3. Nursing. 2024 Feb 1;54(2):27-31. doi: 10.1097/01.NURSE.0000997984.19998.cf.

Food intolerances.

Day M(1), Kuzin J, Spencer M, Hilliard T, Phillips P, Moore A.

Author information:
(1)At the Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Mercedes Day, Julia 
Kuzin, and Priscila Reid are assistant professors, Tara Hilliard is an associate 
professor, Amy Moore is a professor, and Michelle Spencer is an instructor and 
clinical site coordinator.

Food intolerances are prevalent and often confused with food allergies. This 
article reviews the complex landscape of adverse reactions to food, 
distinguishing between immune-mediated responses (food allergies) and nonimmune 
reactions (food intolerances). It also explores specific food intolerances such 
as lactose intolerance, nonceliac gluten sensitivity, fructose intolerance, and 
salicylate sensitivity.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/01.NURSE.0000997984.19998.cf
PMID: 38271126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Nutrients. 2023 Nov 30;15(23):4969. doi: 10.3390/nu15234969.

Myths and Facts about Food Intolerance: A Narrative Review.

Zingone F(1)(2), Bertin L(1)(2), Maniero D(1), Palo M(1), Lorenzon G(1), 
Barberio B(2), Ciacci C(3), Savarino EV(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Oncology and Gastroenterology, University of Padua, 
35124 Padua, Italy.
(2)Gastroenterology Unit, Azienda Ospedale-Università Padova, 35128 Padua, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry, Scuola Medica Salernitana, 
University of Salerno, 84081 Salerno, Italy.

Most adverse reactions to food are patient self-reported and not based on 
validated tests but nevertheless lead to dietary restrictions, with patients 
believing that these restrictions will improve their symptoms and quality of 
life. We aimed to clarify the myths and reality of common food intolerances, 
giving clinicians a guide on diagnosing and treating these cases. We performed a 
narrative review of the latest evidence on the widespread food intolerances 
reported by our patients, giving indications on the clinical presentations, 
possible tests, and dietary suggestions, and underlining the myths and reality. 
While lactose intolerance and hereditary fructose intolerance are based on 
well-defined mechanisms and have validated diagnostic tests, non-coeliac gluten 
sensitivity and fermentable oligosaccharide, disaccharide, monosaccharide, and 
polyol (FODMAP) intolerance are mainly based on patients' reports. Others, like 
non-hereditary fructose, sorbitol, and histamine intolerance, still need more 
evidence and often cause unnecessary dietary restrictions. Finally, the main 
outcome of the present review is that the medical community should work to 
reduce the spread of unvalidated tests, the leading cause of the problematic 
management of our patients.

DOI: 10.3390/nu15234969
PMCID: PMC10708184
PMID: 38068827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


5. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2024 Mar;12(3):607-619. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2023.09.027. Epub 2023 Sep 30.

Nonallergic Diseases Associated With Foods.

Patel PK(1), Tanpowpong P(2), Sriaroon P(1), Lockey RF(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Medicine, Johns Hopkins All Children's Hospital, St 
Petersburg, Fla; Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, Fla.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine 
Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, Fla. Electronic 
address: rlockey@usf.edu.

Clinicians are faced with evaluating real and alleged reactions to foods that 
may be allergic or nonallergic. Pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment of 
various non-IgE-mediated diseases are discussed in this review. These 
food-related conditions range from mild to severe. Referral for an allergy 
workup may be pursued despite the lack of IgE-mediated symptoms. Diagnostic 
testing is available for defined non-IgE-mediated food diseases that are either 
immunologic or nonimmunologic. These include celiac disease and related 
disorders, carbohydrate maldigestion, pancreatic insufficiency, and histamine 
intolerance. In contrast, there is a paucity of definitive studies to prove food 
intolerance diseases. There are no definitive diagnostic criteria or testing for 
nonceliac gluten sensitivity. Functional gastrointestinal disorders, such as 
irritable bowel syndrome, are better stratified diagnostically but still lack 
reliable testing. Both nonceliac gluten sensitivity and irritable bowel syndrome 
are linked to dietary triggers including fermentable oligosaccharides, 
disaccharides, monosaccharides, and polyols. Therefore, dietary alteration alone 
may be diagnostic and therapeutic when all other conditions are ruled out. These 
conditions are important considerations when evaluating a patient with history 
of a food reaction. There is little evidence that foods are causative in other 
ailments such as acne, migraines, and nasal congestion and hypersecretion.

Copyright © 2023 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2023.09.027
PMID: 37783385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Postepy Dermatol Alergol. 2023 Apr;40(2):298-307. doi:
10.5114/ada.2023.126412.  Epub 2023 Apr 5.

Social and economic difficulties of patients with food intolerances.

Bartuzi M(1), Szamocka M(1), Ukleja-Sokołowska N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Nutrition Disorders, Collegium Medicum in 
Bydgoszcz, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Torun, Poland.
(2)Department and Clinic of Allergology, Clinical Immunology and Internal 
Medicine, Collegium Medicum in Bydgoszcz, Nicolaus Copernicus University in 
Torun, Poland.

INTRODUCTION: The basic method of treating food hypersensitivity is the 
elimination diet, which is difficult for the patient in many ways.
AIM: To identify the main problems faced by patients with symptoms of food 
intolerance.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The survey was conducted from February 2021 to December 
2021. The survey was posted in Polish thematic groups on Facebook, dedicated to 
people with food intolerances. The survey contained 34 questions about food 
intolerances and the use of elimination diets. Questions about the cost of the 
diet and difficulties in applying the elimination diet were included.
RESULTS: There was no statistically significant relationship between the type of 
food intolerance and the body mass index of patients. It was found that people 
with lactose intolerance had a lower increase in food expenditure since the 
introduction of the diet than those without lactose intolerance. Almost half of 
the respondents did not find a difference in expenses. 21% of respondents 
noticed an increase of PLN 50-100/month, 19% - PLN 10-50/month, and only 6% 
above PLN 200/month. Circumstances where following an elimination diet is a 
particular challenge included intense private and professional lifestyle, 
prolonged stay away from home, and lack of time to prepare meals at home.
CONCLUSIONS: The difficulties in maintaining an elimination diet are dependent 
on the patient's work and lifestyle. The cost of equivalents of intolerant 
products is also an important factor to consider when analysing the source of 
problems in maintaining the diet.

Copyright: © 2023 Termedia Sp. z o. o.

DOI: 10.5114/ada.2023.126412
PMCID: PMC10258713
PMID: 37312903

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


7. Foods. 2023 Jan 20;12(3):485. doi: 10.3390/foods12030485.

Design of a Plant-Based Yogurt-Like Product Fortified with Hemp Flour: 
Formulation and Characterization.

Montemurro M(1)(2), Verni M(1), Rizzello CG(3), Pontonio E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Soil, Plant and Food Science, University of Bari Aldo Moro, 
70126 Bari, Italy.
(2)National Research Council of Italy, Institute of Sciences of Food Production 
(CNR-ISPA), 70126 Bari, Italy.
(3)Department of Environmental Biology, "Sapienza" University of Rome, 00185 
Rome, Italy.

Plant-based milk alternatives have gained massive popularity among consumers 
because of their sustainable production compared to bovine milk and because of 
meeting the nutritional requests of consumers affected by cow milk allergies and 
lactose intolerance. In this work, hemp flour, in a blend with rice flour, was 
used to design a novel lactose- and gluten-free yogurt-like (YL) product with 
suitable nutritional, functional, and sensory features. The growth and the 
acidification of three different lactic acid bacteria strains were monitored to 
better set up the biotechnological protocol for making the YL product. Hemp 
flour conferred the high fiber (circa 2.6 g/100 g), protein (circa 4 g/100 g), 
and mineral contents of the YL product, while fermentation by selected lactic 
acid bacteria increased the antioxidant properties (+8%) and the soluble fiber 
(+0.3 g/100 g), decreasing the predicted glycemic index (-10%). As demonstrated 
by the sensory analysis, the biotechnological process decreased the earthy 
flavor (typical of raw hemp flour) and increased the acidic and creamy sensory 
perceptions. Supplementation with natural clean-label vanilla powder and agave 
syrup was proposed to further decrease the astringent and bitter flavors. The 
evaluation of the starter survival and biochemical properties of the product 
under refrigerated conditions suggests an estimated shelf-life of 30 days. This 
work demonstrated that hemp flour might be used as a nutritional improver, while 
fermentation with a selected starter represents a sustainable and effective 
option for exploiting its potential.

DOI: 10.3390/foods12030485
PMCID: PMC9914809
PMID: 36766014

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


8. Nutrients. 2021 Dec 21;14(1):2. doi: 10.3390/nu14010002.

Nutrition in Patients with Lactose Malabsorption, Celiac Disease, and Related 
Disorders.

Alkalay MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology 
and Nutrition, University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, TX 75235, USA.

Lactose malabsorption (LM), celiac disease (CD), non-celiac gluten sensitivity 
(NCGS), and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) are conditions associated with food 
triggers, improvement after withdrawal, treatment with dietary restriction, and 
subsequent nutritional detriments. LM occurs when there is incomplete hydrolysis 
of lactose due to lactase deficiency and frequently produces abdominal symptoms; 
therefore, it can cause lactose intolerance (LI). A lactose-restricted diet is 
frequently recommended, although it can potentially lead to nutrient 
deficiencies. Furthermore, lactose is an essential component of fermentable 
oligo-, di-, and monosaccharides and polyols (FODMAPs) and is subsequently 
associated with intolerance to these compounds, especially in IBS. LM commonly 
presents in CD. Nutritional deficits are common in CD and can continue even on a 
gluten-free diet (GFD). Conditions triggered by gluten are known as 
gluten-related disorders (GRDs), including CD, wheat allergy, and NCGS. IBS can 
also be associated with a gluten sensitivity. A GFD is the treatment for CD, 
GRDs, and gluten sensitive IBS, although compliance with this restricted diet 
can be difficult. Strict dietary therapies can have a negative effect on quality 
of life. This review aims to provide an overview of the difficult nutritional 
elements of these disorders, which are critical for medical providers to 
recognize when managing these patients.

DOI: 10.3390/nu14010002
PMCID: PMC8746545
PMID: 35010876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.


9. World J Gastroenterol. 2021 Apr 7;27(13):1311-1320. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v27.i13.1311.

Non-responsive celiac disease in children on a gluten free diet.

Veeraraghavan G(1), Therrien A(2), Degroote M(2), McKeown A(2), Mitchell PD(3), 
Silvester JA(2), Leffler DA(4), Leichtner AM(2), Kelly CP(4), Weir DC(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastro-enterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, United States.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, United States.
(3)Institutional Centers for Clinical and Translational Research, Boston 
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, United States.
(4)The Celiac Center, Department of Medicine and Division of Gastroenterology, 
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA 02215, United States.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, United States. dascha.weir@childrens.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: Non-responsive celiac disease (NRCD) is defined as the persistence 
of symptoms in individuals with celiac disease (CeD) despite being on a 
gluten-free diet (GFD). There is scant literature about NRCD in the pediatric 
population.
AIM: To determine the incidence, clinical characteristics and underlying causes 
of NRCD in children.
METHODS: Retrospective cohort study performed at Boston Children's Hospital 
(BCH). Children < 18 years diagnosed with CeD by positive serology and duodenal 
biopsies compatible with Marsh III histology between 2008 and 2012 were 
identified in the BCH's Celiac Disease Program database. Medical records were 
longitudinally reviewed from the time of diagnosis through September 2015. NRCD 
was defined as persistent symptoms at 6 mo after the initiation of a GFD and 
causes of NRCD as well as symptom evolution were detailed. The children without 
symptoms at 6 mo (responders) were compared with the NRCD group. Additionally, 
presenting signs and symptoms at the time of diagnosis of CeD among the 
responders and NRCD patients were collected and compared to identify any 
potential predictors for NRCD at 6 mo of GFD therapy.
RESULTS: Six hundred and sixteen children were included. Ninety-one (15%) met 
criteria for NRCD. Most were female (77%). Abdominal pain [odds ratio (OR) 1.8 
95% confidence interval (CI) 1.1-2.9], constipation (OR 3.1 95%CI 1.9-4.9) and 
absence of abdominal distension (OR for abdominal distension 0.4 95%CI 0.1-0.98) 
at diagnosis were associated with NRCD. NRCD was attributed to a wide variety of 
diagnoses with gluten exposure (30%) and constipation (20%) being the most 
common causes. Other causes for NRCD included lactose intolerance (9%), 
gastroesophageal reflux (8%), functional abdominal pain (7%), irritable bowel 
syndrome (3%), depression/anxiety (3%), eosinophilic esophagitis (2%), food 
allergy (1%), eating disorder (1%), gastric ulcer with Helicobacter pylori (1%), 
lymphocytic colitis (1%), aerophagia (1%) and undetermined (13%). 64% of 
children with NRCD improved on follow-up.
CONCLUSION: NRCD after ≥ 6 mo GFD is frequent among children, especially 
females, and is associated with initial presenting symptoms of constipation 
and/or abdominal pain. Gluten exposure is the most frequent cause.

©The Author(s) 2021. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v27.i13.1311
PMCID: PMC8015304
PMID: 33833484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: Leffler DA is 
employed by Takeda Pharmaceuticals International Co. Kelly CP has acted as a 
scientific advisor to companies attempting to develop new diagnostic and 
management approaches for Celiac disease including Cour Pharma, Glutenostics, 
Innovate, Immunogenx and Takeda. He also acts as Principal Investigator on a 
research grant on Celiac disease supported by Aptalis. Silvester JA has served 
on an advisory board for Takeda Pharmaceuticals and has received research 
funding from Biomedal S.L., Cour Pharma and Glutenostics.


10. Food Res Int. 2020 Dec;138(Pt B):109780. doi: 10.1016/j.foodres.2020.109780. 
Epub 2020 Oct 15.

Food and food products associated with food allergy and food intolerance - An 
overview.

Muthukumar J(1), Selvasekaran P(1), Lokanadham M(1), Chidambaram R(2).

Author information:
(1)Instrumental and Food Analysis Laboratory, School of Biosciences and 
Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu 632014, India.
(2)Instrumental and Food Analysis Laboratory, School of Biosciences and 
Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu 632014, India. 
Electronic address: cramalingam@vit.ac.in.

Immune-mediated food allergy and non-immune mediated food intolerance are 
categorized as the most common adverse reactions resulting from the ingestion of 
certain foods. As there is no standard treatment, the possible remedy to avoid 
exposure to these adverse reactions is adhering to a strict diet that eliminates 
allergic and intolerant foods. The commonly consumed foods including dairy 
products, egg, fish, shellfish, tree nuts, peanut, soybean, and wheat-based 
products are proven to cause food allergy. Foods containing lactose, gluten, 
high FODMAPs, biogenic amines, and certain food additives leads to potential 
health risks in intolerant individuals. Besides, there are various foods whose 
mechanism of action in triggering food allergy and intolerance is yet to be 
defined. However, the public in-depth understanding of natural foods, processed 
foods, and packaged food products that induce allergic reactions and intolerance 
remains low. Therefore, awareness of diet that partially or completely excludes 
the intake of certain foods associated with these reactions should be widespread 
among the consumers.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodres.2020.109780
PMID: 33288166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]