1. Nutrients. 2020 Jul 29;12(8):2277. doi: 10.3390/nu12082277.

Beneficial Effects of a Low-Nickel Diet on Relapsing IBS-Like and 
Extraintestinal Symptoms of Celiac Patients during a Proper Gluten-Free Diet: 
Nickel Allergic Contact Mucositis in Suspected Non-Responsive Celiac Disease.

Borghini R(1), De Amicis N(1), Bella A(2), Greco N(1), Donato G(1), Picarelli 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational and Precision Medicine, Sapienza University, 
00185 Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 00161 Rome, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Nickel (Ni)-rich foods can induce allergic contact mucositis 
(ACM) with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)-like symptoms in predisposed subjects. 
Ni ACM has a high prevalence (>30%) in the general population and can be 
diagnosed by a Ni oral mucosa patch test (omPT). Many celiac disease (CD) 
patients on a gluten-free diet (GFD) often show a recrudescence of 
gastrointestinal and extraintestinal symptoms, although serological and 
histological remission has been achieved. Since a GFD often results in higher 
loads of ingested alimentary Ni (e.g., corn), we hypothesized that it would lead 
to a consequent intestinal sensitization to Ni in predisposed subjects. We 
wanted to (1) study Ni ACM prevalence in still symptomatic CD patients on a GFD 
and (2) study the effects of a low-Ni diet (LNiD) on their recurrent symptoms.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We recruited 102 consecutive CD patients (74 female, 28 
male; age range 18-65 years, mean age 42.3 ± 7.4) on a GFD since at least 12 
months, in current serological and histological remission (Marsh-Oberhuber type 
0-I) who complained of relapsing gastrointestinal and/or extraintestinal 
symptoms.
INCLUSION CRITERIA: presence of at least three gastrointestinal symptoms with a 
score ≥5 on the modified Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale (GSRS) 
questionnaire.
EXCLUSION CRITERIA: IgE-mediated food allergy; history of past or current 
cancer; inflammatory bowel diseases; infectious diseases including Helicobacter 
pylori; lactose intolerance. All patients enrolled underwent Ni omPT and 
followed a LNiD for 3 months. A 24 symptoms questionnaire (GSRS modified 
according to the Salerno Experts' Criteria, with 15 gastrointestinal and 9 
extraintestinal symptoms) was administered at T0 (free diet), T1 (GFD, CD 
remission), T2 (recurrence of symptoms despite GFD), and T3 (GFD + LNiD) for 
comparisons. Comparisons were performed using Wilcoxon signed-rank test.
RESULTS: Twenty patients (all female, age range 23-65 years, mean age 39.1 ± 
2.9) out of 102 (19.6%) were finally included. All 20 patients enrolled (100%) 
showed positive Ni omPT, confirming an Ni ACM diagnosis. A correct GFD (T0 vs. 
T1) induced the improvement of 19 out of the total 24 (79.2%) symptoms, and 14 
out of 24 (58.3%) were statistically significant (p-value < 0.0083 according to 
Bonferroni correction). Prolonged GFD (T1 vs. T2) revealed the worsening of 20 
out of the total 24 (83.3%) symptoms, and 10 out of 24 (41.7%) were 
statistically significant. LNiD (T2 vs. T3) determined an improvement of 20 out 
of the total 24 (83.4%) symptoms, and in 10 out of 24 (41.7%) symptoms the 
improvement was statistically significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that the recrudescence of gastrointestinal and 
extraintestinal symptoms observed in CD subjects during GFD may be due to the 
increase in alimentary Ni intake, once gluten contamination and persisting 
villous atrophy are excluded. Ni overload can induce Ni ACM, which can be 
diagnosed by a specific Ni omPT. Improvement of symptoms occurs after a proper 
LNiD. These encouraging data should be confirmed with larger studies.

DOI: 10.3390/nu12082277
PMCID: PMC7468824
PMID: 32751300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


2. Clin Nucl Med. 2015 Oct;40(10):796-8. doi: 10.1097/RLU.0000000000000913.

Oral Cholecystagogue Cholescintigraphy: A Systematic Review of Fatty Meal 
Options.

Fotos JS(1), Tulchinsky M.

Author information:
(1)From the Section of Nuclear Medicine, Department of Radiology, Milton S. 
Hershey Medical, Center, Penn State University, Hershey, PA.

OBJECTIVES: Intermittent unavailability of sincalide for determination of 
gallbladder ejection fraction (GBEF) prompted increased usage of fatty meal 
cholecystagogues (FMCs). The aim of this systematic review was to identify the 
state of current FMC options in cholescintigraphy, focusing on the quality of 
corresponding normal GBEF values.
METHODS: We performed an extensive literature search of the MEDLINE, Cochrane, 
and CINAHL databases without date or language restrictions with a broad spectrum 
of search terms. Selection criteria required both that the study use a FMC as 
part of a stimulated GBEF examination to gather data on normal volunteers or 
patients without evidence of gastrointestinal disease and that the meal used be 
described sufficiently for emulation. A cumulative point system was used to 
grade the quality of normal GBEF values: 1 point for screening ultrasound, 1 
point for detailed screening questionnaire, 1 point for 20 or greater number of 
participants in a study, 1 additional point for 60 or greater number of 
participants in a study, 0.5 points for cursory screening questions, and 0 
points when no screening process was mentioned. The meal was expressed in grams 
of fat per volume, when available.
RESULTS: Twelve studies met inclusion criteria out of 15 studies claiming to 
report normal values. Two studies (17%) achieved a score of 3, 5 studies (42%) 
at 2 to 2.5, 3 studies (25%) at 1 to 1.5, and the remaining 2 studies (17%) at 0 
to 0.5. Total number of participants examined ranged from 6 to 100. Meal 
composition varied widely. In 1 study, sham feeding was used. Most meals had 
components that could present problems to patients with relatively common 
dietary restrictions (ie, lactose intolerance, egg protein allergy, etc). 
Results for proposed normal values varied widely (from 16.3% to 85.6%). The 
commercial fatty meal products of Humana Infant Formula 1 and Ensure Plus 
offered the highest-quality normal values.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a need to establish high-quality normal GBEF range for a 
ubiquitous fatty meal (ie, a meal that would be widely available, easy to 
prepare, inexpensive, and free of sensitivity-provoking ingredients). A corn oil 
emulsion, has immense potential as an ideal FMC, limited currently only by its 
lack of established normal values. Currently, the highest-quality normal GBEF 
values available for FMC exist for 2 commercial products, Humana Infant Formula 
1 and Ensure Plus. However, these products may not be readily available at some 
institutions, and neither one is free from dietary restrictions.

DOI: 10.1097/RLU.0000000000000913
PMID: 26222535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Acta Biomed. 2008 Aug;79(2):144-50.

Intestinal inflammation in nursing infants: different causes and a single 
treatment ... but of protected origin.

Pancaldi M(1), Mariotti I, Balli F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital of Modena, Modena, Italy.

Three case histories of nursing infants suffering from different forms of 
intestinal problems, who underwent special dietary therapy in order to solve 
situations that would be difficult to deal with using the special artificial 
milk varieties on the market, are presented. These children were administered a 
homemade food consisting ofParmigiano Reggiano cheese seasoned for at least 36 
months, rice or maize custard and tapioca, sugar, maize oil. In the first case 
the diagnosis of "widespread nonspecific acute colitis" was made compatible with 
"antibiotic-associated colitis" and Clostridium difficile was isolated from the 
feces. The second case, under the suspicion of cow's milk allergy, was fed by 
soya and hydrolyzed milk with persitent disturbed alvus with greenish feces and 
mucus. The third case was represented by a nursing child with persistent 
diarrhoic alvus after an acute episode with subsequent intolerance to rice milk. 
After the introduction of the food based on Parmigiano Reggiano cheese, all 
cases showed a rapid and progressive improvement of symptoms and alvus 
characteristics and were discharged with increased weight. The Parmigiano 
Reggiano cheese shows a high concentration of easily absorbed amino acids and 
oligopeptides like a hydrolyzed proteic preparation. As regards the lipoid 
component the medium and short chain fatty acids are directly absorbed in the 
bowel and immediately usable as a significant source of energy. Finally, another 
relevant characteristic of Parmigiano Reggiano cheese is the complete absence of 
lactose. The use of Parmigiano Reggiano cheese as a dietary therapy is 
appropriate not only for its high nutritional value, but also for its 
characteristics as a functional food that produces beneficial effects on health 
with regards to the gastrointestinal tract and the inflammatory problems 
resulting from alimentary intolerance, post-therapeutic antibiotic dismicrobism, 
or post-infective conditions. Moreover, its efficay on these pathologic 
conditions is further improved by the prebiotic and probiotic effects resulting 
from the oligosaccharides and the bacterial flora of this natural food product, 
only derived from the nature and the work of skilled artisans closely tied to 
tradition.

PMID: 18788512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Am J Clin Nutr. 2003 Jun;77(6):1478-83. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/77.6.1478.

Fortification of orange juice with vitamin D: a novel approach for enhancing 
vitamin D nutritional health.

Tangpricha V(1), Koutkia P, Rieke SM, Chen TC, Perez AA, Holick MF.

Author information:
(1)Vitamin D, Skin, and Bone Research Laboratory, Section of Endocrinology, 
Diabetes, and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of 
Medicine, MA 02118, USA.

BACKGROUND: Fortification of milk with vitamin D may not be adequate for 
satisfying the vitamin D requirement because of variability in vitamin D content 
after fortification and because many persons have milk allergy or lactose 
intolerance. Additional foods need to be fortified with vitamin D.
OBJECTIVE: We determined whether vitamin D, a fat-soluble vitamin, is 
bioavailable in orange juice and skim milk, 2 nonfat beverages.
DESIGN: On 3 separate occasions, 18 adults ingested 25 000 IU vitamin D(2) in 
240 mL whole milk or skim milk or in 0.1 mL corn oil applied to toast. A 
separate, double-blind, randomized, controlled trial investigated whether the 
consumption of orange juice fortified with vitamin D(3) would increase serum 
25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] concentrations: 14 subjects ingested 240 mL orange 
juice fortified with 1000 IU vitamin D, and 12 subjects ingested a control 
orange juice daily for 12 wk.
RESULTS: Peak serum vitamin D(2) concentrations did not differ significantly 
after the ingestion of vitamin D(2) in whole milk, skim milk, or corn oil on 
toast. After subjects consumed orange juice fortified with 1000 IU vitamin D(3) 
daily for 12 wk, serum 25(OH)D(3) concentrations increased by 150%, and serum 
parathyroid hormone concentrations decreased by 25% compared with baseline; 
control subjects had a seasonal increase of 45% in 25(OH)D and no significant 
change in serum parathyroid hormone.
CONCLUSIONS: The fat content of milk does not affect vitamin D bioavailability. 
Vitamin D fortification at 1000 IU/240 mL orange juice for 12 wk safely 
increased 25(OH)D(3) concentrations in adults.

DOI: 10.1093/ajcn/77.6.1478
PMID: 12791627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Vopr Pitan. 1993 Oct-Dec;(5):50-3.

[Effects of dietary fat composition on food anaphylaxis and formaldehyde 
sensitization in guinea pigs].

[Article in Russian]

Malikova NA, Pestova MI, Krzhechkovskaia VV, Gmoshinskiĭ IV, Mazo VK.

Adult guinea pigs were fed for 10-14 days with synthetic diets, fat constituting 
11% of its total energy. Dietary fat was composed of coconut, corn, dairy and 
soybean oils mixtures with ratio of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) omega-6 
to PUFA omega-3 equal to 24.2 (K1) or 5.53 (K2). The animals were sensitized 
orally by pasteurized cow milk (PCM) or epicutaneously by formaldehyde (F) 
during these diets feeding. The degree of the sensitization was assessed in the 
reaction of active anaphylactic shock (AAS) in PCM-sensitized animals and in the 
reaction of leukocytes specific lysis (LSL) in F-sensitized guinea pigs. In the 
latter pigs the concentration of serum antibodies (Ab) against dietary soya 
protein was measured by ELISA. Animals fed by K1 and K2 were also tested for 
histamine mean lethal dose resistance. The lowest lethality in AAS, number of 
convulsions, of positive LSL cases and Ab level were found in animals fed by K1 
compared to both K2 and to animals fed by common animal chew. Resistance to 
histamine was similar in K1 and K2 groups, but was significantly higher compared 
to control (chew) group. In convulsion, the changes in PUFA omega-6/PUFA omega-3 
ratio have marked effect on different indices of allergic sensitivity.

PMID: 8042314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Bol Med Hosp Infant Mex. 1989 Aug;46(8):537-42.

[Nutritional recovery in marasmus using soy formula enriched with L-methionine].

[Article in Spanish]

Vásquez-Garibay EM, Santos-Torres MI, Covarrubias-González MC.

It was evaluated the nutritional recovery of infants with marasmus using two 
different formulas: formula "X", soy based formula enriched con L-methionine; 
formula "Y" modified milk based formula; both, added with corn syrup at 10%. 
Seventeen infants were fed formula "X" and seventeen infants received formula 
"Y". The calorie and water intake were similar in both groups (p greater than 
0.05). The protein intake was higher with formula "X" (p less than 0.05). After 
four weeks of study weight, height, triceps and sub-scapular skinfold, 
weight/age, height/age and weight/height did not showed significative 
differences (p greater than 0.05). Arm circumference was higher in the group fed 
formula "Y" (p less than 0.025). The final serum concentration of total 
proteins, albumin, calcium and magnesium was also higher in the group receiving 
formula "Y". It was required a major amount of calories and proteins per unit of 
gained body weight in the group of formula "X" (p less than 0.05 and p less than 
0.005 respectively). Modified in fat and protein milk based formula represents a 
better choice for nutritional recovery of infants with severe malnutrition under 
one year of age. Soy based formulas enriched with l-methionine would be only 
used when intolerance to lactose or milk protein allergy are present.

PMID: 2508696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Nutr Rep Int. 1986 Nov;34(5):915-9.

Proposed weaning formula for developing countries.

Hafez YS, Elqadri SS.

PIP: This article proposes a process of combining soybean, corn and wheat to 
make an inexpensive weaning formula, and suggests that animal feeding studies, 
human organoleptic (taste) tests and finally feeding trials on infants be 
conducted. The method combines 3 steps involving soybean yogurt, corn starch 
solution and cracked wheat gruel. First a yogurt is fermented from cracked 
soybeans cooked in sodium bicarbonate solution, with sucrose added, and 
homogenized. Then corn is cracked, soaked, boiled, homogenized and sieved. Wheat 
bulgar (cooked cracked wheat) is powdered and boiled. The soy, corn and wheat 
components are mixed 3:2:1, sterilized and packaged. These operations would 
require equipment to mill, cook, time, measure and adjust pH, incubate, 
homogenize, sieve, weigh, compute dry weight, sterilize and package the formula. 
The authors tabulate published amino acid analysis of soy, corn and wheat. They 
propose to test the formula on laboratory animals to determine the feed 
efficiency ratio compared to standard chow diets, to test organoleptic quality 
on adult humans and finally to test the formula on weaned infants. It is 
anticipated that this formula will be inexpensive and appropriate for children 
with lactose or galactose intolerance or milk allergy.

PMID: 12281326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]