1. J Clin Med. 2023 Jul 12;12(14):4639. doi: 10.3390/jcm12144639.

Determinants of Severe Nocturnal Hypoxemia in Adults with Chronic Thromboembolic 
Pulmonary Hypertension and Sleep-Related Breathing Disorders.

Çınar C(1), Yıldızeli ŞO(1), Balcan B(2), Yıldızeli B(3), Mutlu B(4), Peker 
Y(2)(5)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, School of Medicine, Marmara University, 
Istanbul 34854, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, School of Medicine, Koç University, 
Istanbul 34450, Turkey.
(3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, School of Medicine, Marmara University, 
Istanbul 34854, Turkey.
(4)Department of Cardiology, School of Medicine, Marmara University, Istanbul 
34854, Turkey.
(5)Department of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, University of Gothenburg, 405 
30 Gothenburg, Sweden.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Faculty of Medicine, Lund 
University, 221 00 Lund, Sweden.
(7)Division of Sleep and Circadian Disorders, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(8)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, School of 
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA.

OBJECTIVES: We aimed to investigate the occurrence of sleep-related breathing 
disorders (SRBDs) in patients with chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension 
(CTEPH) and addressed the effect of pulmonary hemodynamics and SRBD indices on 
the severity of nocturnal hypoxemia (NH).
METHODS: An overnight polysomnography (PSG) was conducted in patients with 
CTEPH, who were eligible for pulmonary endarterectomy. Pulmonary hemodynamics 
(mean pulmonary arterial pressure (mPAP), pulmonary arterial wedge pressure 
(PAWP), pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) measured with right heart 
catheterization (RHC)), PSG variables (apnea-hypopnea index (AHI)), lung 
function and carbon monoxide diffusion capacity (DLCO) values, as well as 
demographics and comorbidities were entered into a logistic regression model to 
address the determinants of severe NH (nocturnal oxyhemoglobin saturation (SpO2) 
< 90% under >20% of total sleep time (TST)). SRBDs were defined as obstructive 
sleep apnea (OSA; as an AHI ≥ 15 events/h), central sleep apnea with 
Cheyne-Stokes respiration (CSA-CSR; CSR pattern ≥ 50% of TST), obesity 
hypoventilation syndrome (OHS), and isolated sleep-related hypoxemia (ISRH; SpO2 
< 88% under >5 min without OSA, CSA, or OHS).
RESULTS: In all, 50 consecutive patients (34 men and 16 women; mean age 54.0 (SD 
15.1) years) were included. The average mPAP was 43.8 (SD 16.8) mmHg. SRBD was 
observed in 40 (80%) patients, of whom 27 had OSA, 2 CSA-CSR, and 11 ISRH. None 
had OHS. Severe NH was observed in 31 (62%) patients. Among the variables 
tested, age (odds ratio (OR) 1.08, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.01-1.15; p = 
0.031), mPAP (OR 1.11 [95% CI 1.02-1.12; p = 0.012]), and AHI (OR 1.17 [95% CI 
1.02-1.35; p = 0.031]) were independent determinants of severe NH.
CONCLUSIONS: Severe NH is highly prevalent in patients with CTEPH. Early 
screening for SRBDs and intervention with nocturnal supplemental oxygen and/or 
positive airway pressure as well as pulmonary endarterectomy may reduce adverse 
outcomes in patients with CTEPH.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12144639
PMCID: PMC10380264
PMID: 37510754

Conflict of interest statement: Y.P. declares institutional grants from the 
ResMed Foundation, outside the submitted work. C.Ç., Ş.O.Y., B.B., B.Y. and B.M. 
report no disclosures.


2. Molecules. 2020 May 1;25(9):2129. doi: 10.3390/molecules25092129.

Valorisation of By-Products from Soybean (Glycine max (L.) Merr.) Processing.

Colletti A(1), Attrovio A(1), Boffa L(1), Mantegna S(1), Cravotto G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Drug Science and Technology, University of Turin, Via P. Giuria 
9, 10125 Turin, Italy.
(2)Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Centre of Bioanalytical 
Research and Molecular design, 8 Trubetskaya ul, 119991 Moscow, Russia.

In recent years, increased awareness of the health benefits associated with 
consuming soy-based foods, knowledge of milk-related allergies and a move 
towards more sustainable food production have led to an increase in the number 
of available soy-based products. The biggest producers in the world, the USA, 
South America and China, are from the Pacific region. This enormous production 
is accompanied by the accumulation of related by-products, in particular, a 
substance that is known as okara. Okara is a paste that is rich in fibre (50%), 
protein (25%), fat (10%), vitamins and trace elements. Its proper use would lead 
to economic advantages and a reduction in the potential for polluting the 
environment. Its high fibre content and low production costs mean that it could 
also be used as a dietary supplement to prevent diabetes, obesity and 
hyperlipidaemia. Chemical or enzymatic treatment, fermentation, extrusion, high 
pressure and micronisation can all increase the soluble fibre content, and thus 
improve nutritional quality and processing properties. However, the product also 
degrades rapidly due to its high moisture content (70-80%), which makes it 
difficult to handle and expensive to dry by conventional means. The aim of this 
paper is therefore to thoroughly study the existing literature on this subject 
in order to develop a general protocol for okara exploitation and valorisation. 
A cost/benefit analysis could drive the design of eco-friendly, sustainable 
protocols for the preparation of high-value nutritional products.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules25092129
PMCID: PMC7248727
PMID: 32370073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


3. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2019 May;16(5):554-562. doi:
10.1513/AnnalsATS.201807-446OC.

Fish Oil Supplementation in Overweight/Obese Patients with Uncontrolled Asthma. 
A Randomized Trial.

Lang JE(1), Mougey EB(2), Hossain MJ(3), Livingston F(4), Balagopal PB(5), 
Langdon S(6), Lima JJ(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Division of Allergy/Immunology and Pulmonary Medicine, Duke University, 
Durham, North Carolina.
(2)2 Center for Pharmacogenomics and Translational Research, Nemours Children's 
Health System, Jacksonville, Florida.
(3)3 Center for Pediatric Research, Alfred I. DuPont Hospital of Children, 
Wilmington, Delaware.
(4)4 Nemours Children's Hospital, Orlando, Florida.
(5)5 Biomedical Analysis Laboratory, Nemours Children's Specialty Care, 
Jacksonville, Florida; and.
(6)6 Department of Immunology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North 
Carolina.

Comment in
    Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2019 May;16(5):542-544. doi: 
10.1513/AnnalsATS.201901-049ED.

Rationale: Omega-3 fatty acid (n3PUFA) supplementation has been proposed as a 
promising antiasthma strategy. The rs59439148 ALOX5 polymorphism affects 
leukotriene production and possibly inflammatory responses to n3PUFA. 
Objectives: Assess the effects of n3PUFA supplementation and ALOX5 genotype on 
asthma control in patients with obesity and uncontrolled asthma. Methods: This 
multicenter trial among 12- to 25-year-olds with overweight/obesity and 
uncontrolled asthma randomized subjects in a 3:1 allotment to n3PUFA (4 g/d) or 
soy oil control for 24 weeks. Asthma Control Questionnaire was the primary 
outcome; secondary outcomes included blood leukocyte n3PUFA levels, urinary 
leukotriene-E4, spirometry, and asthma-related events. The number of SP1 tandem 
repeats in rs59439148 determined ALOX5 genotype status. Simple and multivariable 
generalized linear models assessed effects on outcomes. Results: Ninety-eight 
participants were randomized (77 to PUFA, 21 to control), and more than 86% 
completed all visits. Asthma and demographic characteristics were similar among 
treatment groups. n3PUFA treatment increased the n3-to-n6 PUFA ratio in 
circulating granulocytes (P = 0.029) and monocytes (P = 0.004) but did not 
affect mean Asthma Control Questionnaire change at 6 months (n3PUFA: mean, 
-0.09; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.09 to 0.10; vs. control: mean, -0.18; 95% 
CI, -0.42 to 0.06; P = 0.58). Changes in urinary leukotriene-E4 (P = 0.24), 
forced expiratory volume in 1 second % predicted (P = 0.88), and exacerbations 
(relative risk [RR], 0.92; 95% CI, 0.30-2.89) at 6 months were similar in both 
groups. n3PUFA treatment was associated with reduced asthma-related phone 
contacts (RR, 0.34; 95% CI, 0.13-0.86; P = 0.02). ALOX5 genotype did not affect 
n3PUFA treatment responses. Conclusions: We did not find evidence that n3PUFA 
use improves most asthma-related outcomes and cannot recommend it as a 
prevention strategy for overweight/obese patients with asthma. Clinical trial 
registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT01027143).

DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201807-446OC
PMCID: PMC6491059
PMID: 30678465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Recent Pat Food Nutr Agric. 2015;7(2):92-9. doi: 
10.2174/2212798407666150629123957.

Immunomodulatory Effects of Soybeans and Processed Soy Food Compounds.

Tezuka H(1), Imai S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biodefense Research, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan. 
tezco.bre@mri.tmd.ac.jp.

Inflammation is an immune response against both internal and external antigens 
in organisms, particularly in mammals, and includes both uncontrolled chronic 
and low-grade inflammations. Uncontrolled chronic inflammation often leads to 
severe diseases such as vascular disease, arthritis, cancer, diabete, allergy, 
and autoimmunity. On the other hand, low-grade inflammation is recognized as a 
relationship between obesity and risk of metabolic syndrome. Elevated production 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines and mediators is commonly observed in patients 
with uncontrolled or low-grade inflammation-associated diseases. Plants have 
been generated phytochemicals to overcome inflammations and infections through 
evolution. Phytochemicals belong to alkaloids, polyphenols, flavonoids, 
coumarins, and terpenoids. The consumption of soybeans plays a role in immune 
modulation through their components such as isoflavones, saponins, and 
anthocyanins. Recently, it was reported that the application of phytochemicals 
into patients with inflammatory diseases improves their symptoms. Therefore, it 
is important to identify novel phytochemicals with immunomodulatory activities. 
This review introduces and discusses recent advances and patents regarding 
soybean or processed soy food compounds which exhibit immunomodulatory activity 
in immune diseases, particularly allergy, by mediating the suppression of 
inflammatory pathways.

DOI: 10.2174/2212798407666150629123957
PMID: 26118769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Contemp Clin Trials. 2013 Mar;34(2):326-35. doi: 10.1016/j.cct.2012.12.009.
Epub  2013 Jan 6.

Nutrigenetic response to omega-3 fatty acids in obese asthmatics (NOOA): 
rationale and methods.

Lang JE(1), Mougey EB, Allayee H, Blake KV, Lockey R, Gong Y, Hossain J, Killen 
K, Lima JJ; Nemours Network for Asthma Research.

Collaborators: Lang JE, Rutledge B, Schaeffer D, Leonard S, Socher R, Lang JE, 
Livingston F, Lucas J, Kesser B, Price A, Lockey R, Grandstaff M, Croker S, 
Smith L, Guilbert T, Garret-Mayer E, Duckworth L, Warde M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Sleep Medicine, Nemours Children's Hospital, 
Orlando, FL, USA. jelang@nemours.org

Uncontrolled asthma is a major cause of hospitalizations and emergency room 
visits. Factors including obesity, African ancestry and childhood are associated 
with increased asthma severity. Considering the high morbidity caused by asthma, 
relatively few classes of drugs exist to control this common disease. Therefore, 
new therapeutic strategies may be needed to reduce asthma's impact on public 
health. Data suggest that a high fat diet that is deficient in omega-3 fatty 
acids could promote both obesity and excessive inflammation, resulting in 
greater asthma severity. Small trials with supplemental omega-3 fatty acids have 
been conducted with encouraging but inconsistent results. The variability in 
response seen in past trials may be due to the past subjects' genetics 
(specifically ALOX5 rs59439148) or their particular asthma phenotypes. 
Therefore, the "Nutrigenetic response to Omega-3 Fatty acids in Obese Asthmatics 
(NOOA)" trial is currently underway and was designed as a randomized, 
double-blind, placebo controlled intervention study to determine if supplemental 
omega-3 fatty acids improves symptoms among obese adolescents and young adults 
with uncontrolled asthma. Here we report the design and rationale for the NOOA 
trial. Participants were given either 3.18 g daily of eicosapentaenoic acid and 
822 mg daily docosahexaenoic acid, or matched control soy oil, for 24 weeks. 
Change in the asthma control questionnaire score was the primary outcome. 
Secondary outcomes included spirometry, impulse oscillometry, exacerbation rate, 
airway biomarkers, systemic inflammation, leukotriene biosynthesis and 
T-lymphocyte function. NOOA may lead to a new therapeutic treatment strategy and 
greater understanding of the mechanistic role of diet in the pathogenesis of 
asthma.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cct.2012.12.009
PMCID: PMC3638234
PMID: 23298524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS Disclosures: Dr. Lang has no 
conflicts of interest in the subject matter of this manuscript Dr. Mougey has no 
conflicts of interest in the subject matter of this manuscript Dr. Blake has no 
conflicts of interest in the subject matter of this manuscript Dr. Yong as no 
conflicts of interest in the subject matter of this manuscript Dr. Lockey has no 
conflicts of interest in the subject matter of this manuscript Dr. Hossain has 
no conflicts of interest in the subject matter of this manuscript Dr. Lima has 
no conflicts of interest in the subject matter of this manuscript


6. Bull Acad Natl Med. 2009 Feb;193(2):431-46.

[Infant nutrition].

[Article in French]

Salle B.

Nutritional quality during the first weeks of life can influence health during 
both infancy and adulthood. Exclusive long-term breast feeding is strongly 
recommended, particularly for infants at risk of allergy. It protects against 
gastrointestinal and respiratory infections, and has been shown to enhance 
cognitive and intellectual development. Breast-feeding is also associated with a 
lower risk of obesity and type 1 diabetes in infants and of cardiovascular 
disease in adults. Breast-feeding is rarely contraindicated. Multiple European 
and French guidelines and regulations govern the composition of infant formulas, 
which may be given during the first year of life when breast-feeding is 
unavailable. Hypoallergenic and soy-based formulas are not recommended for 
healthy infants.

PMID: 19718896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Int J Med Sci. 2007 Feb 26;4(2):72-82. doi: 10.7150/ijms.4.72.

Role of dietary soy protein in obesity.

Velasquez MT(1), Bhathena SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, George Washington University Medical Center, 
Washington, DC, USA.

Soy protein is an important component of soybeans and provides an abundant 
source of dietary protein. Among the dietary proteins, soy protein is considered 
a complete protein in that it contains ample amounts of all the essential amino 
acids plus several other macronutrients with a nutritional value roughly 
equivalent to that of animal protein of high biological value. Soy protein is 
unique among the plant-based proteins because it is associated with isoflavones, 
a group of compounds with a variety of biological properties that may 
potentially benefit human health. An increasing body of literature suggests that 
soy protein and its isoflavones may have a beneficial role in obesity. Several 
nutritional intervention studies in animals and humans indicate that consumption 
of soy protein reduces body weight and fat mass in addition to lowering plasma 
cholesterol and triglycerides. In animal models of obesity, soy protein 
ingestion limits or reduces body fat accumulation and improves insulin 
resistance, the hallmark of human obesity. In obese humans, dietary soy protein 
also reduces body weight and body fat mass in addition to reducing plasma 
lipids. Several potential mechanisms whereby soy protein may improve insulin 
resistance and lower body fat and blood lipids are discussed and include a wide 
spectrum of biochemical and molecular activities that favorably affect fatty 
acid metabolism and cholesterol homeostasis. The biologic actions of certain 
constituents of soy protein, particularly conglycinin, soyasaponins, 
phospholipids, and isoflavones, that relate to obesity are also discussed. In 
addition, the potential of soy protein in causing food allergy in humans is 
briefly discussed.

DOI: 10.7150/ijms.4.72
PMCID: PMC1838825
PMID: 17396158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.


8. Arch Pediatr. 2005 Dec;12 Suppl 3:S145-65. doi: 10.1016/j.arcped.2005.10.006. 
Epub 2005 Nov 21.

[Breast feeding: health benefits for child and mother].

[Article in French]

Turck D(1); Comité de nutrition de la Société française de pédiatrie.

Author information:
(1)Unité de gastroentérologie, hépatologie et nutrition, CHRU de Lille, hôpital 
Jeanne-de-Flandre, Lille, France.

Comment in
    Arch Pediatr. 2005 Dec;12 Suppl 3:S143-4. doi: 10.1016/j.arcped.2005.10.005.

Breast milk contains hormones, growth factors, cytokines, cells, etc., and 
offers many advantages over cow's milk or soy protein infant formulae. The 
composition of breast milk is influenced by gestational and postnatal age. 
Prevalence of breastfeeding in France is one of the lowest in Europe: in 2003, 
only 58% of infants were breastfed when leaving the maternity ward, for a median 
duration of 10 weeks. Breastfeeding allows normal growth until at least 6 months 
of age, and can be prolonged until the age of 2 years or more, provided that 
complementary feeding is started after 6 months. Breastfeeding is associated 
with slightly enhanced performance on tests of cognitive development. Exclusive 
breastfeeding for at least 3 months is associated with a lower incidence and 
severity of diarrhoea, otitis media and respiratory infection. Exclusive 
breastfeeding for at least 6 months is associated with a lower incidence of 
allergic disease in at-risk infants (infants with at least one first-degree 
relative presenting with allergy). Breastfeeding is also associated with a lower 
incidence of obesity during childhood and adolescence, as well as with a lower 
incidence of hypertension and hypercholesterolemia in adulthood. Maternal 
infection with hepatitis B and C virus is not a contraindication to 
breastfeeding, as opposed to HIV infection and galactosemia. A supplementation 
with vitamin D and K is necessary in the breastfed infant. Very few medications 
contraindicate breastfeeding. Premature babies can be breastfed and/or receive 
mother's milk and/or bank milk, provided they receive energy, protein and 
mineral supplements. Return to prepregnancy weight is earlier in breastfeeding 
mothers. Breastfeeding is also associated with a decreased risk of breast and 
ovarian cancer in the premenopausal period, and of hip fractures and 
osteoporosis in the postmenopausal period.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arcped.2005.10.006
PMID: 16300936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Rev Invest Clin. 2005 May-Jun;57(3):457-72.

[Molecular mechanisms of action and health benefits of polyunsaturated fatty 
acids].

[Article in Spanish]

Rodríguez-Cruz M(1), Tovar AR, del Prado M, Torres N.

Author information:
(1)Uniddad de Investigación Médica en Nutrición, Centro Médico Nacional Siglo 
XXI, IMSS.

Essential polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), linoleic acid n6 (LA) and 
linolenic acid (ALA) n3 obtained from the diet are precursors of the long-chain 
polyunsaturated fatty acids (Lc-PUFAs) arachidonic acid (AA) and docosahexaenoic 
acid (DHA) respectively. Consumption of PUFAs is related with a better 
neurological and cognitive development in newborns. It has been demonstrated 
that consumption of n-6 and n-3 PUFAs decreases blood triglycerides by 
increasing fatty acid oxidation through activation of PPARalpha or by reducing 
the activation of SREBP-1 inhibiting lipogenesis. Dietary PUFAs activate 
PPARalpha and PPARgamma increasing lipid oxidation, and decreasing insulin 
resistance leading in a reduction of hepatic steatosis. Beneficial effects of 
PUFAs have been observed in humans and in animals models of diabetes, obesity, 
cancer, and cardiovascular diseases. It is important to promote the consumption 
of PUFAs. Main food sources of PUFAs n-6 are corn, soy and safflower oil, and 
for PUFAs n-3 are fish, soy, canola oil and, flaxseed. Finally FAO/WHO 
recommends an optimal daily intake of n6/n3 of 5-10:1.

PMID: 16187707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Agric Food Chem. 2001 Mar;49(3):1069-86. doi: 10.1021/jf0009246.

Nutritional and health benefits of soy proteins.

Friedman M(1), Brandon DL.

Author information:
(1)Western Regional Research Center, Agricultural Research Service, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, 800 Buchanan Street, Albany, CA 94710, USA.

Soy protein is a major component of the diet of food-producing animals and is 
increasingly important in the human diet. However, soy protein is not an ideal 
protein because it is deficient in the essential amino acid methionine. 
Methionine supplementation benefits soy infant formulas, but apparently not food 
intended for adults with an adequate nitrogen intake. Soy protein content of 
another essential amino acid, lysine, although higher than that of wheat 
proteins, is still lower than that of the milk protein casein. Adverse 
nutritional and other effects following consumption of raw soybean meal have 
been attributed to the presence of endogenous inhibitors of digestive enzymes 
and lectins and to poor digestibility. To improve the nutritional quality of soy 
foods, inhibitors and lectins are generally inactivated by heat treatment or 
eliminated by fractionation during food processing. Although lectins are 
heat-labile, the inhibitors are more heat-stable than the lectins. Most 
commercially heated meals retain up to 20% of the Bowman-Birk (BBI) inhibitor of 
chymotrypsin and trypsin and the Kunitz inhibitor of trypsin (KTI). To enhance 
the value of soybeans in human nutrition and health, a better understanding is 
needed of the factors that impact the nutrition and health-promoting aspects of 
soy proteins. This paper discusses the composition in relation to properties of 
soy proteins. Also described are possible beneficial and adverse effects of 
soy-containing diets. The former include soy-induced lowering of cholesterol, 
anticarcinogenic effects of BBI, and protective effects against obesity, 
diabetes, irritants of the digestive tract, bone, and kidney diseases, whereas 
the latter include poor digestibility and allergy to soy proteins. Approaches to 
reduce the concentration of soybean inhibitors by rearrangement of protein 
disulfide bonds, immunoassays of inhibitors in processed soy foods and soybean 
germplasm, the roles of phytoestrogenic isoflavones and lectins, and research 
needs in all of these areas are also discussed. This integrated overview of the 
widely scattered literature emphasizes general concepts based on our own studies 
as well as recent studies by others. It is intended to stimulate interest in 
further research to optimize beneficial effects of soy proteins. The payoff will 
be healthier humans and improved animal feeds.

DOI: 10.1021/jf0009246
PMID: 11312815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]