1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2022 Aug 5;101(31):e29606. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000029606.

Epidemiological survey of self-reported food allergy among university students 
in China.

Feng H(1), Liu Y(2), Xiong X(3), Xu Q(2), Zhang Z(2), Wu Y(4), Lu Y(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Nanchang University, 
School of Public Health, Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China.
(2)School of Public Health, Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Basic Medical College of Nanchang University, 
Nanchang, Jiangxi, China.
(4)NHC Key Lab of Food Safety Risk Assessment, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences Research Unit (2019RU014 Food Safety), China National Center for Food 
Safety Risk Assessment (CFSA), Beijing, China.
(5)Environmental Health Laboratory, Department of Public Health Sciences, 
University of Hawaii, USA.

The aim of this study was to investigate the prevalence of self-reported food 
allergy among university students in China. A cluster-random sampling 
population-based cross-sectional study using self - administrated questionnaire 
was conducted with 2538 college students recruited from 6 universities in China. 
The questionnaire included data on age, sex, weight, height, FA, comorbid 
allergic diseases, family history, and understanding food allergy. Data were 
analyzed by SPSS 25.0 statistical software. Multivariate logistic regression 
analysis was performed to analyze the risk factors related to self-reported food 
allergy and estimate the odds ratio. A total of 2538 questionnaires were 
distributed to the undergraduate students and 2313 completely effective 
questionnaires were collected, the effective response rate was 91.1%. 834 males 
and 1479 females were recruited, and their age ranged from 18 to 25 years old. 
The prevalence of self-reported food allergy was 15.7%, and the rate of 
doctor-diagnosed food allergy was 8.4%. The leading food allergens included 
shrimp, shellfish, milk, egg, peach, mango, beef, and peanut, and the prevalence 
of shrimp allergy was the highest (5.8%). The main clinical manifestation 
included skin mucous membrane and respiratory symptoms. The prevalence of food 
allergy were statistically significant difference (P < .05) between different 
age groups, family history, sun exposure times, smoking, and antibiotic use. 
Over 45% college students know little about food allergy. The prevalence of 
self-reported food allergy among Chinese college students was high (15.7%). 
Shrimp was the main allergenic food, followed by shellfish, milk, egg, peach, 
and mango. Family history, sun exposure, obesity, and using antibiotics may be 
the influencing factors of food allergy. The Chinese undergraduates lacked the 
knowledge about food allergy. Thus, it is necessary to strengthen the health 
education program on food allergy for college students in China and other middle 
high-income nations.

Copyright © 2022 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000029606
PMCID: PMC9351933
PMID: 35945794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.


2. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Feb 4;23(3):1801. doi: 10.3390/ijms23031801.

Road to The Red Carpet of Edible Crickets through Integration into the Human 
Food Chain with Biofunctions and Sustainability: A Review.

Kemsawasd V(1), Inthachat W(1), Suttisansanee U(1), Temviriyanukul P(1).

Author information:
(1)Food and Nutrition Academic and Research Cluster, Institute of Nutrition, 
Mahidol University, Salaya, Phuttamonthon, Nakhon Pathom 73170, Thailand.

The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) estimates that 
more than 500 million people, especially in Asia and Africa, are suffering from 
malnutrition. Recently, livestock farming has increased to supply high-quality 
protein, with consequent impact on the global environment. Alternative food 
sources with high nutritive values that can substitute livestock demands are 
urgently required. Recently, edible crickets have been promoted by the FAO to 
ameliorate the food crisis. In this review, the distribution, nutritive values, 
health-promoting properties (antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-diabetic and 
anti-obesity), safety, allergenicity as well as the potential hazards and risks 
for human consumption are summarized. Cricket farming may help to realize the 
United Nations sustainable development goal No. 2 Zero Hunger. The 
sustainability of cricket farming is also discussed in comparison with other 
livestock. The findings imply that edible crickets are safe for daily intake as 
a healthy alternative diet due to their high protein content and 
health-promoting properties. Appropriate use of edible crickets in the food and 
nutraceutical industries represents a global business potential. However, people 
who are allergic to shellfish should pay attention on cricket allergy. Thus, the 
objective of this review was to present in-depth and up-to-date information on 
edible crickets to advocate and enhance public perception of cricket-based food.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23031801
PMCID: PMC8836810
PMID: 35163720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


3. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2021 Jan;9(1):193-199. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2020.07.039. Epub 2020 Aug 6.

Prevalence of Physician-Reported Food Allergy in Canadian Children.

Singer AG(1), Kosowan L(1), Soller L(2), Chan ES(2), Nankissoor NN(3), Phung 
RR(4), Abrams EM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy and Immunology, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)University College Dublin School of Medicine, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Max Rady College of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(5)Department of Family Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada; 
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy and Immunology, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Electronic address: 
elissa.abrams@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Food allergy prevalence data have largely been derived from 
self-report, and estimates vary.
OBJECTIVE: Determine the prevalence of physician-reported food allergy in 
children using electronic medical record data from the Canadian Primary Care 
Sentinel Surveillance Network (CPSSN).
METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort study using the CPCSSN repository, 
Canada's only primary care practice-based surveillance system. Machine learning 
algorithms were applied to assess for food allergy documentation. Demographic 
information, chronic diseases of interest, prescribed medications, and health 
behaviors from the CPCSSN repository were identified.
RESULTS: The prevalence of physician-reported food allergy in Canadian children 
was 2.53% (95% CI, 2.48%-2.59%). The most common food allergies documented were 
peanut (0.8% of children), tree nut (0.6%), cow's milk (0.4%), egg (0.3%), fruit 
(0.2%), finned fish (0.2%), and shellfish (0.2%). Among children with food 
allergy, only 33.7% had an epinephrine autoinjector prescription. In logistic 
regression analysis, children with food allergy were more likely to have an 
atopic comorbidity (odds ratio [OR], 2.20; 95% CI, 2.06-2.35) and less likely to 
be obese than children without food allergies (OR, 0.84; 95% CI, 0.78-0.90). In 
the age- and sex-adjusted models, patients with food allergy were significantly 
more likely to have a psychiatric morbidity, specifically: attention 
deficit/hyperactivity disorder (OR, 1.81; 95% CI, 1.66-1.96), autism (OR, 1.89; 
95% CI, 1.63-2.19), and depression (OR, 1.17; 95% CI, 1.02-1.35).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study is the first to estimate national physician-reported 
prevalence of food allergy, and demonstrates a lower rate than that based on 
self-report. Further studies into the association of food allergy and 
psychiatric comorbidities (attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, autism, 
depression) and the association of food allergy and obesity are needed.

Copyright © 2020 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2020.07.039
PMID: 32771686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Recenti Prog Med. 2013 Oct;104(10):545-53. doi: 10.1701/1349.15001.

[Swept away and squashed between myth based medicine and eminence based 
medicine. Metaphor of medical meta-cognition. What are we doing wrong with our 
patient?].

[Article in Italian]

Cervellin G, Rastelli G, Lippi G.

Myths have played essential social functions throughout human history, and 
modern medical culture makes no exception. Despite ongoing scientific efforts, 
clinicians still encounter biological phenomena that they can hardly explain. In 
this ocean of uncertainty they continue, either consciously or unconsciously, to 
convey a number of myths, which are also used as professional tools. Although in 
recent decades clinical research and randomized trials have emerged as the main 
arbiters of truth in medicine, there are still large areas of uncertainty that 
are consistently filled up with tradition, common sense and experience. In this 
context, mysticism seldom represent a latent source of error, especially when it 
penetrates education and medical literature, so growing to the role of 
indisputable truth, which can hardly be eradicated. The aim of this article is 
to discuss some paradigmatic examples of medical myths, such as the use of 
beta-blockers in patients with heart failure, the risk of administering opioids 
in patients with abdominal pain, the suggestion to drink at least eight glasses 
of water per day, the risk of using contrast media in patients with shellfish 
allergy, the indiscriminate prescription of a huge number of laboratory tests to 
achieve an efficient diagnosis, the use of garlic for treat a kaleidoscope of 
human disorders, fructose as a viable replacement for sucrose, the relationship 
between obesity and mortality or between sex and caloric consumption, and the 
cognitive biases.

DOI: 10.1701/1349.15001
PMID: 24326707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]