1. Plant Foods Hum Nutr. 2024 Dec 12;80(1):8. doi: 10.1007/s11130-024-01264-w.

Gluten-free Diet, a Friend or a Foe, an American Perspective.

Alam T(1), Saripalli G(1), Rustgi S(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, Clemson University Pee Dee 
Research and Education Center, Florence, SC, 29506, USA.
(2)Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, Clemson University Pee Dee 
Research and Education Center, Florence, SC, 29506, USA. srustgi@clemson.edu.
(3)School of Health Research, Clemson University, Clemson, SC, 29634, USA. 
srustgi@clemson.edu.
(4)Center for Human Genetics, Clemson University, Greenwood, SC, 29646, USA. 
srustgi@clemson.edu.

Gluten proteins in cereal grains are often considered unsafe for health. Indeed, 
the dissemination of misinformation through various sources has led to a 
widespread misconception that the consumption of gluten by healthy individuals 
results in adverse health consequences and contributes to obesity. In recent 
years, many health-conscious consumers have started reducing or avoiding gluten 
consumption without a medical recommendation. Consequently, the adoption of 
gluten-free diets has expanded significantly. This study compared 39 gluten-free 
products and their gluten-containing counterparts for energy, sugar, dietary 
fiber content, and price. We found that, on average, gluten-free products 
available to United States consumers contained significantly less protein and 
more sugar and calories. Furthermore, on average, gluten-free products are more 
expensive than gluten-containing products. Our finding may serve as a guide for 
dietitians, nutritionists, and legislators in introducing a gluten-free 
prescription list for individuals with celiac disease, wheat allergy, and 
non-celiac wheat sensitivity.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11130-024-01264-w
PMID: 39666134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics Approval: Not applicable. 
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.


2. Food Res Int. 2024 Dec;197(Pt 1):115238. doi: 10.1016/j.foodres.2024.115238. 
Epub 2024 Oct 20.

Do cooking techniques influence copper bioaccesibility in foods after in vitro 
digestion/fermentation in adults and children?

García-Conde Ú(1), Navarro-Moreno M(2), Navajas-Porras B(2), Hinojosa-Nogueira 
D(2), Delgado-Osorio A(2), Pastoriza S(1), Moriki D(3), Douros K(3), 
Navarro-Alarcón M(4), Ángel Rufián-Henares J(5).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Nutrición y Bromatología, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad 
de Granada, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Nutrición y Bromatología, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad 
de Granada, Spain; Instituto de Nutrición y Tecnología de los Alimentos, INyTA 
(IBS), Universidad de Granada, Spain.
(3)Pediatric Allergy and Respiratory Unit, 3rd Department of Pediatrics, 
"Attikon" University Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 
School of Medicine, 11527 Athens, Greece.
(4)Departamento de Nutrición y Bromatología, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad 
de Granada, Spain; Instituto de Nutrición y Tecnología de los Alimentos, INyTA 
(IBS), Universidad de Granada, Spain. Electronic address: nalarcon@ugr.es.
(5)Departamento de Nutrición y Bromatología, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad 
de Granada, Spain; Instituto de Nutrición y Tecnología de los Alimentos, INyTA 
(IBS), Universidad de Granada, Spain; Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria 
(IBS), Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain.

Cu is essential for the growth and organism health. Classically, its available 
fraction has been studied by in vitro digestion studies as a measure of 
bioaccessibility of Cu (Cu-BA). In this work we applied a novel in vitro 
digestion/fermentation method to multiple foods subjected to different home 
cooking techniques (raw form vs. frying, roasting, toasting, boiling and 
grilling) by metabolization with faecal inoculate from healthy adults (HE-AD), 
and healthy children (HE-CH) and sick children (children with gluten related 
disorders, GRD-CH; children with obesity, OB-CH; and children with 
allergy/intolerance to cow's milk proteins, AICM-CH). In raw and cooked foods 
the bioaccessibility of Cu in the small intestine (Cu-BASI) was higher vs. that 
in the Cu bioaccessibility in the large intestine (Cu-BALI) (30.8 ± 15.4 and 
28.2 ± 14.7 vs. 18.4 ± 21.2 and 22.8 ± 22.1 %, respectively; p < 0.001). Total 
Cu-BA in cooked foods (51.0 ± 24.4 %) was higher than that in raw foods 
(49.0 ± 25.1 %). In cereals, total Cu-BA was higher in the raw form, as well as 
in whole grains and those with gluten (p < 0.05). In vegetables, the most 
drastic cooking techniques (roasting and frying) show higher values of total 
Cu-BA compared to raw form and boiling. The Cu-BALI in HE-CH (37.7 ± 23.7 %) is 
higher than that determined in HE-AD (14.1 ± 18.5 %) and sick children (GRD-CH: 
14.6 ± 19.8; OB-CH: 15.5 ± 17.8; and AICM-CH: 26.9 ± 19.3 %; p < 0.001). In 
conclusion, cooking techniques influence Cu-BA depending on the food group. 
Total Cu-BA, as well as that determined in the large and small intestine varied 
according to the category, group and specific foods, which is related to their 
different composition and species of the element. In healthy children, total 
Cu-BALI is higher than in adults and celiac, obese and allergic children 
probably due to growth requirements and specific microbiota.

Copyright © 2024 Universidad de Granada. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodres.2024.115238
PMID: 39593320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


3. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2024 Jun 1;102(6):391-395. doi:
10.1139/cjpp-2023-0464.  Epub 2024 Apr 8.

Discontinuing semaglutide after weight loss: strategy for weight maintenance and 
a possible new side effect.

Carris NW(1), Wallace S(2), DuCoin CG(3), Mhaskar R(4), Stern M(5), Bunnell 
B(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapeutics and Clinical Research, USF Health Taneja 
College of Pharmacy, University of South Florida; 12901 Bruce B. Downs Blvd MDC 
30, Tampa FL, 33612, USA.
(2)Tampa General Medical Group, 2211 Lithia Center Ln, Valrico, FL 33594, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, USF Health Morsani College of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, 5 Tampa General Circle, Suite 410, Tampa, FL 33606, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, USF Health Morsani College of Medicine, 
University of South Florida, 560 Channelside Drive MDD 54, Tampa, FL 33602, USA.
(5)Department of Child and Family Studies, College of Behavioral and Community 
Sciences, University of South Florida 13301 Bruce B. Downs Blvd., MHC 2510, 
Tampa, FL 33612, USA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurosciences, USF Health Morsani 
College of Medicine, University of South Florida 3515 E. Fletcher Ave, Tampa, FL 
33613, USA.

Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs) facilitate weight loss. 
Weight regain off therapy is concerning. We reported the case of a 35-year-old 
male prescribed oral semaglutide with 22.7 kg weight loss over 120 days. Herein, 
we describe the clinical course when discontinuing GLP-1 RA therapy, one 
approach to maintaining weight loss after discontinuation, and a possible new 
side effect. At day 120, we continued oral semaglutide 7 mg daily, down from 
14 mg, for weight maintenance with subsequent weight regain. We re-increased 
semaglutide to 14 mg/day with weight re-loss within 1 month and weight maintance 
for a year. We then discontinued semaglutide; weight loss was maintained for 6 
months. The patient reported lactose intolerance ∼13 months before starting 
semaglutide. During semaglutide therapy, the patient reported worsened lactose 
intolerance and new gluten intolerance. Food allergy/celiac testing were 
negative. Intolerances did not improve with semaglutide discontinuation. Six 
months after semaglutide discontinuation, the patient was diagnosed with small 
intestinal bacterial overgrowth, possibly worsened by semaglutide. Factors 
potentially supporting weight maintenance were early drug treatment for 
new-onset obesity, non-geriatric age, strength training, and diet modification. 
The case highlights tailoring approaches to maintain weight loss without GLP-1 
RAs. Trials are needed to optimize weight maintenance strategies.

DOI: 10.1139/cjpp-2023-0464
PMID: 38587178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Carris has received research funding 
(institution receives and manages funds) from Sanofi Winthrop Industries. Dr. 
DuCoin declares consulting for Johnson & Johnson, Medtronic, and Intuitive. The 
remaining authors have no conflicts of interest, or other interests, that might 
be perceived to influence the results and/or discussion reported in this paper.


4. Pediatrics. 2023 Feb 1;151(2):e2022058380. doi: 10.1542/peds.2022-058380.

Complementary and Allergenic Food Introduction in Infants: An Umbrella Review.

Soriano VX(1)(2), Ciciulla D(1)(2)(3), Gell G(2), Wang Y(2)(3)(4), Peters 
RL(1)(2), McWilliam V(2)(3)(5), Dharmage SC(1)(6), Koplin JJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Food and Allergy Research.
(2)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, Australia.
(3)Department of Paediatrics.
(4)School of Psychology, Faculty of Health, Deakin University, Burwood, 
Australia.
(5)Department of Allergy, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Australia.
(6)School of Population and Global Health, University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Multiple systematic reviews examine the introduction of foods in 
relation to individual health outcomes, but the balance of harms and benefits 
has not been overviewed systematically.
OBJECTIVES: We aimed to perform an overview of systematic reviews on age of 
introduction of complementary and allergenic foods to the infant diet and long 
and short-term health outcomes.
DATA SOURCES: We searched Medline, Embase, Cochrane, and PubMed (July 25, 2022).
STUDY SELECTION: Included systematic reviews examining the introduction of 
complementary or allergenic foods before age 1. Outcomes included allergic, 
autoimmune, and inflammatory diseases, neurodevelopment, nutrition, and weight.
DATA EXTRACTION: Extraction and quality assessment were performed in duplicate 
(A Measurement Tool to Assess Systematic Reviews) and strength of evidence was 
assessed.
RESULTS: We screened 4015 articles and included 32 systematic reviews. There was 
moderate evidence that peanut and egg should be introduced from 4 to 11 months 
to prevent food allergy (6 of 10 reviews). Complementary food introduction was 
not associated with food allergy. Moderate certainty evidence suggested age of 
complementary food introduction was not associated with eczema. Age at 
introduction of gluten was not associated with celiac disease (high certainty 
evidence; 3 of 4 reviews). Low certainty evidence indicated that introducing 
solids before 4 months may increase the risk of childhood obesity, but not 
growth. There was insufficient evidence regarding an association between any 
food introduction and bone health, gastrointestinal diseases, autoimmune 
disorders, asthma, or allergic rhinitis.
LIMITATIONS: Gray literature was not included.
CONCLUSIONS: Current evidence supports introducing complementary foods around 6 
months and allergenic foods before 11 months.

Copyright © 2023 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2022-058380
PMID: 36704902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Foods. 2022 May 19;11(10):1480. doi: 10.3390/foods11101480.

The Stance4Health Project: Evaluating a Smart Personalised Nutrition Service for 
Gut Microbiota Modulation in Normal- and Overweight Adults and Children with 
Obesity, Gluten-Related Disorders or Allergy/Intolerance to Cow's Milk.

Dello Russo M(1), Russo P(1), Rufián-Henares JÁ(2)(3), Hinojosa-Nogueira 
D(2)(3), Pérez-Burillo S(2), de la Cueva SP(2)(3), Rohn S(4)(5), Fatouros A(4), 
Douros K(6), González-Vigil V(7), Epstein D(8), Francino MP(9)(10), Siani A(1), 
Lauria F(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Food Sciences, National Research Council, 83100 Avellino, Italy.
(2)Departamento de Nutrición y Bromatología, Instituto de Nutrición y Tecnología 
de los Alimentos, Centro de Investigación Biomédica, Universidad de Granada, 
18071 Granada, Spain.
(3)Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria ibs. GRANADA, Universidad de Granada, 
18071 Granada, Spain.
(4)Department of Food Chemistry and Analysis, Institute of Food Technology and 
Food Chemistry, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany.
(5)Institute of Food Chemistry, Hamburg School of Food Science, University of 
Hamburg, 20146 Hamburg, Germany.
(6)Pediatric Allergy and Respiratory Unit, 3rd Department of Pediatrics, 
"Attikon" University Hospital, School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, 12462 Athens, Greece.
(7)Gestión de Salud y Nutrición S.L., 33003 Oviedo, Spain.
(8)Department of Applied Economics, University of Granada, 18071 Granada, Spain.
(9)Area de Genòmica i Salut, Fundació per al Foment de la Investigació Sanitària 
i Biomèdica de la Comunitat Valenciana (FISABIO-Salut Pública), 46020 Valencia, 
Spain.
(10)CIBER en Epidemiología y Salud Pública, 28001 Madrid, Spain.

Unhealthy diets represent a major risk for the pathogenesis of metabolic and 
chronic inflammatory diseases. Improving the quality of diet is important to 
prevent chronic diseases, and diet-induced modifications of the gut microbiota 
(GM) community likely play an important role. The EU-funded Stance4Health 
project aims at performing a randomized clinical trial based on a nutritional 
intervention program in the context of normal weight and overweight adults as 
well as children with obesity and gluten-related disorders or 
allergy/intolerance to cow's milk. The trial will evaluate the efficacy of a 
Smart Personalised Nutrition (SPN) service in modifying GM composition and 
metabolic function and improving consumer empowerment through technology 
adoption.

DOI: 10.3390/foods11101480
PMCID: PMC9141043
PMID: 35627049

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


6. Clin Nutr. 2021 Dec;40(12):5684-5709. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2021.09.039. Epub
2021  Oct 20.

ESPEN guideline on hospital nutrition.

Thibault R(1), Abbasoglu O(2), Ioannou E(3), Meija L(4), Ottens-Oussoren K(5), 
Pichard C(6), Rothenberg E(7), Rubin D(8), Siljamäki-Ojansuu U(9), Vaillant 
MF(10), Bischoff SC(11).

Author information:
(1)Unité de Nutrition, CHU Rennes, INRAE, INSERM, Univ Rennes, Nutrition 
Metabolisms and Cancer Institute, NuMeCan, Rennes, France. Electronic address: 
ronan.thibault@chu-rennes.fr.
(2)Department of Surgery, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(3)Department of Nutrition, Limassol General Hospital, Cyprus.
(4)Riga Stradins University, Pauls Stradins Clinical University Hospital, 
Latvia.
(5)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, 
Location VUmc, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)Unité de Nutrition, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland.
(7)Faculty of Health Sciences Kristianstad University Kristianstad Sweden, 
Sweden.
(8)Vivantes Netzwerk für Gesundheit GmbH, Humboldt Klinikum und Klinikum 
Spandau, Berlin, Germany.
(9)Clinical Nutrition Unit, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.
(10)Department of Dietetics, Grenoble University Hospital, Grenoble, France.
(11)University of Hohenheim, Institute of Nutritional Medicine, Stuttgart, 
Germany.

Comment in
    Clin Nutr. 2022 Feb;41(2):570. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2021.12.029.
    Clin Nutr. 2022 Feb;41(2):571. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2021.12.028.
    Clin Nutr. 2022 Mar;41(3):786. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2022.01.005.
    Clin Nutr. 2022 Mar;41(3):787. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2022.01.007.
    Clin Nutr. 2022 May;41(5):1144-1145. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2022.03.011.
    Clin Nutr. 2022 May;41(5):1142-1143. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2022.03.012.
    Clin Nutr. 2022 Aug;41(8):1845-1846. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2022.06.024.
    Clin Nutr. 2022 Aug;41(8):1847-1848. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2022.06.028.

In hospitals through Europe and worldwide, the practices regarding hospital 
diets are very heterogeneous. Hospital diets are rarely prescribed by 
physicians, and sometimes the choices of diets are based on arbitrary reasons. 
Often prescriptions are made independently from the evaluation of nutritional 
status, and without taking into account the nutritional status. Therapeutic 
diets (low salt, gluten-free, texture and consistency modified, …) are 
associated with decreased energy delivery (i.e. underfeeding) and increased risk 
of malnutrition. The European Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism 
(ESPEN) proposes here evidence-based recommendations regarding the organization 
of food catering, the prescriptions and indications of diets, as well as 
monitoring of food intake at hospital, rehabilitation center, and nursing home, 
all of these by taking into account the patient perspectives. We propose a 
systematic approach to adapt the hospital food to the nutritional status and 
potential food allergy or intolerances. Particular conditions such as patients 
with dysphagia, older patients, gastrointestinal diseases, abdominal surgery, 
diabetes, and obesity, are discussed to guide the practitioner toward the best 
evidence based therapy. The terminology of the different useful diets is 
defined. The general objectives are to increase the awareness of physicians, 
dietitians, nurses, kitchen managers, and stakeholders towards the pivotal role 
of hospital food in hospital care, to contribute to patient safety within 
nutritional care, to improve coverage of nutritional needs by hospital food, and 
reduce the risk of malnutrition and its related complications.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd and European Society for Clinical Nutrition and 
Metabolism. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clnu.2021.09.039
PMID: 34742138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The expert members of the 
working group were accredited by the ESPEN Guidelines Group, the ESPEN Education 
and Clinical Practice Committee, and the ESPEN executive. All expert members 
have declared their individual conflicts of interest according to the rules of 
the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE). If potential 
conflicts were indicated, they were reviewed by the ESPEN guideline officers 
and, in cases of doubts, by the ESPEN executive. None of the expert panel had to 
be excluded from the working group or from co-authorship because of serious 
conflicts. The conflict of interest forms are stored at the ESPEN guideline 
office and can be reviewed by ESPEN members with legitimate interest upon 
request to the ESPEN executive.


7. Fac Rev. 2021 Jul 27;10:62. doi: 10.12703/r/10-62. eCollection 2021.

Recent advances in palmoplantar pustulosis.

Brunasso AMG(1), Massone C(1).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Unit, Galliera Hospital, Genoa, Italy.

Palmoplantar pustulosis (PPP) is a chronic inflammatory condition where crops of 
sterile pustules with erythematous keratotic lesions causing bleeding and pain 
appear on the palms and soles. Recently, the European Rare and Severe Expert 
Network considered PPP as a variant of pustular psoriasis with or without 
psoriasis vulgaris. The prevalence of PPP varies from 0.050 to 0.12%. PPP occurs 
more frequently in women and the highest prevalence occurred between the ages of 
50 and 69 years. Nail psoriasis seems to be frequent in PPP, ranging from 30 to 
76%, and psoriatic arthritis in 8.6 to 26% of PPP patients. Synovitis, acne, 
pustulosis, hyperostosis, osteitis (SAPHO) syndrome and pustulotic 
arthro-osteitis are considered PPP-associated disorders. PPP has been reported 
with other co-morbidities such as psychiatric disorders, thyroid-associated 
disease, altered calcium homeostasis, gluten sensitivity diabetes, obesity, and 
dyslipidemia, but larger studies are required to prove such associations. 
Environmental exacerbating factors might contribute to the onset or worsening of 
PPP such as cigarette smoking, stress, focal infections, metal allergies, and 
drug intake. Genetic predisposition plays an important role in PPP. In PPP, both 
the innate and the adaptive immune systems are activated. The acrosyringeal 
expression of IL-17 has been demonstrated, indicating that the eccrine sweat 
gland is an active component of the skin barrier and an immune-competent 
structure. Increased levels of several inflammatory molecules, including IL-8, 
IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-17A, IL-17C, IL-17D, IL-17F, IL-22, IL-23A, and IL-23 receptor, 
have been detected in PPP biopsies. Increased serum levels of TNF-α, IL-17, 
IL-22, and IFN-γ have been detected in patients with PPP in comparison to 
healthy subjects, suggesting a similar inflammatory pattern to psoriasis 
vulgaris. Oral and tonsillar infections serve as trigger factors for PPP. 
Long-term therapy is required for many patients, but high-quality data are 
limited, contributing to uncertainty about the ideal approach to treatment.

Copyright: © 2021 Massone C et al.

DOI: 10.12703/r/10-62
PMCID: PMC8361749
PMID: 34409425

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.No competing interests were disclosed.No competing interests were 
disclosed.


8. Minerva Gastroenterol Dietol. 2020 Sep;66(3):187-193. doi: 
10.23736/S1121-421X.20.02673-2. Epub 2020 May 12.

Pilot study on non-celiac gluten sensitivity: effects of Bifidobacterium longum 
ES1 co-administered with a gluten-free diet.

Di Pierro F(1), Bergomas F(2), Marraccini P(2), Ingenito MR(2), Ferrari L(2), 
Vigna L(2).

Author information:
(1)Scientific Department, Velleja Research, Milan, Italy - 
f.dipierro@vellejaresearch.com.
(2)Obesity and Work Center, Occupational Medicine Unit, Department of Preventive 
Medicine, Maggiore Polyclinic Hospital, IRCCS Ca' Granda Foundation, Milan, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Bifidobacterium longum ES1 is a strain probiotic, colonizing the 
human gut and capable of a degradative action on gliadin. In an attempt to find 
new nutritional solutions aimed at improving the quality of life of patients 
with non-celiac gluten sensitivity (NCGS) we evaluated the effectiveness of this 
strain, in association with a gluten-free diet, comparing its efficacy versus 
diet therapy alone.
METHODS: The experimental design included a non-randomized, open-label, 1:1 
intervention study in parallel groups. Enrolled patients with symptoms 
attributable to NCGS, and with negative diagnoses of both wheat allergy and 
celiac disease, were included in this three-month trial divided into four 
outpatient visits (baseline, T1, T2 and T3). Fifteen patients for each group 
completed the experimental protocol.
RESULTS: Our results showed that a combination of diet and probiotic determined 
a more significant reduction in the frequency and intensity of intestinal and 
extra-intestinal symptoms, and a clear improvement in stool consistency.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the study was carried out on a small number of patients, 
the results of our pilot trial suggest that a combined strategy of naturally 
gluten-free diet therapy with administration of the probiotic strain ES1 appears 
to offer a greater advantage than the dietary regime alone in improving the 
clinical symptomatic picture and in stabilizing the intestinal microbiota.

DOI: 10.23736/S1121-421X.20.02673-2
PMID: 32397695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Vopr Pitan. 2020;89(1):19-27. doi: 10.24411/0042-8833-2020-10002. Epub 2020
Jan  24.

[The role of nutritional factors and food allergy in the development of 
psoriasis].

[Article in Russian]

Barilo AA(1), Smirnova SV(1).

Author information:
(1)Federal Research Center «Krasnoyarsk Science Center» of the Siberian Branch 
of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Scientific Research Institute of Medical 
Problems of the North, 660022, Krasnoyarsk, Russian Federation.

Psoriasis is a chronic relapsing disease that affects about 2% of the world's 
population and leads to medical and social losses. There is evidence of the 
effect of nutritional factors on the course of psoriasis in modern literature. 
The aim of the research was to analyze modern domestic and foreign literature on 
the role of nutritional factors, food allergies and the state of the 
gastrointestinal tract in the etiopathogenesis of psoriasis Material and 
methods. The electronic resources were used in preparing the article: the 
PubMed/MEDLINE portal, "Scientific Electronic Library eLIBRARY.RU". The 
following filters and keywords were requested: psoriasis and nutrition, food 
allergies and psoriasis, gastrointestinal manifestations and psoriasis, diet and 
psoriasis, obesity and psoriasis. Results and discussion. The role of nutrition 
as a predictor of the development of psoriatic skin rashes and exacerbation of 
the disease has been discussed. The mechanisms of the positive influence of the 
correction of metabolic disorders on skin processes in patients with psoriasis 
have been analyzed. It has been noted that further studies are needed to study 
the effectiveness of a lowcalorie diet for psoriasis treatment. Particular 
attention has been paid to the role of food allergy and pathology of the 
gastrointestinal tract in the etiopathogenesis of psoriatic disease. It is noted 
that in patients with psoriasis, structural and functional disorders in the 
gastrointestinal tract are observed, which lead to metabolic changes, 
endotoxinemia and autosensitization of the body. The role of intolerance to 
certain foods in the development of psoriasis has been discussed. Most of the 
available data indicate a high incidence of celiac disease and gluten 
intolerance in patients with psoriasis, however, information about the 
effectiveness of a gluten-free diet is controversial. Attention is drawn to the 
"non-celiac gluten sensitivity" associated with psoriasis, which represents a 
syndrome of neither allergic nor autoimmune genesis, which is manifested by 
gluten intolerance and characterized by symptoms similar to celiac disease. An 
increase in the frequency of occurrence of a high concentration of specific IgE 
to potato and carrot allergens in patients with psoriasis is noted, which most 
likely reflects cross-reactions with pollen allergens. An interesting hypothesis 
is the discussion of a lesion of the gastrointestinal tract in the presence of 
food allergies in patients with psoriasis, which may be a reflection of the 
systemic dermatogastrointestinal process and manifest psoriatic rashes on the 
skin. The mechanism of the anti-inflammatory effect associated with adhering to 
the Mediterranean diet for psoriasis is described in detail. Conclusion. The 
data presented allow us to consider the role of nutrition in the 
etiopathogenesis of psoriasis as significant, both from the point of view of the 
influence of nutritional factors and food allergens, that must be taken into 
account when prescribing therapeutic nutrition and elimination diet in 
combination with standard systemic therapy.

Copyright© GEOTAR-Media Publishing Group.

DOI: 10.24411/0042-8833-2020-10002
PMID: 32083821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no overt and potential 
conflict of interest related to the publication of this article.


10. Foods. 2019 Dec 9;8(12):660. doi: 10.3390/foods8120660.

From the Laboratory to the Kitchen: New Alternatives to Healthier Bakery 
Products.

Peris M(1), Rubio-Arraez S(2), Castelló ML(2), Ortolá MD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Universitat Politècnica de València, Camino de Vera, 
s/n. 46022 Valencia, Spain.
(2)Institute of Food Engineering for Development, Universitat Politècnica de 
València, Camino de Vera, s/n. 46022 Valencia, Spain.

Due to the growing interest in improving the nutritional profile of bakery 
products, we have dealt with the most recent and relevant contributions 
regarding potential replacements for carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. Focusing 
on the influence of carbohydrates on metabolism, their excess implies obesity, 
diabetes and tooth decay. However, they are technologically important, since 
they are responsible for the structure of many bakery products. Regarding of the 
lipid profile, saturated fats have a great impact on the appearance of 
cardiovascular disease. Fortunately, nature and the food industry offer 
alternatives to traditional oils/butters with large amounts of omega 3 and other 
components that can mitigate these problems. Other relevant aspects are related 
to allergies concerning egg proteins, gluten or even requirements for vegan 
consumers. Several studies have been performed in this line, replacing eggs with 
milk serum, different mucilages obtained from legumes or some gums, etc. In 
conclusion, many papers have been published showing the possibility of 
successfully replacing (both at technological and sensory levels) less healthy 
ingredients with others that are nutritionally better. The challenge now is to 
combine these better components in a given product, as well as to evaluate 
possible interactions among them.

DOI: 10.3390/foods8120660
PMCID: PMC6963723
PMID: 31835412

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.